[PAGE 1]
THE STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA (PROHIBITION OF IMPROPER USE) ACT, 2005
No. 50 of 2005 (20th December, 2005)

An Act to prohibit the improper use of State Emblem of India for professional
and commercial purposes and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:-

Short title, 1. (1) This Act may be called the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of
extent,
Improper Use) Act, 2005.application and
commencement
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and also applies to citizens of India outside
India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Definitions 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-

(a) "competent authority" means any authority competent under any law for the
time being in force to register any company, firm, other body of persons or any
trade mark or design or to grant a patent;

(b) "emblem" means the State Emblem of India as described and specified in the
Schedule to be used as an official seal of the Government.

Prohibition of 3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
improper use of
force, no person shall use the emblem or any colourable imitation thereof in anyemblem.
manner which tends to create an impression that it relates to the Government or
that it is an official document of the Central Government, or as the case may be,
the State Government, without the previous permission of the Central
Government or of such officer of that Government as may be authorised by it in
this behalf.

Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, "person" includes a former
functionary of the Central Government or the State Governments.

Prohibition of 4. No person shall use the emblem for the purpose of any trade, business, calling
use of emblem or profession or in the title of any patent, or in any trade mark or design, except
for wrongful
in such cases and under such conditions as may be prescribed.gain.

Prohibition of 5. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
registration of
force, no competent authority shall,-certain
companies, etc.
(a) register a trade mark or design which bears the emblem, or

(b) grant patent in respect of an invention which bears a title containing the
emblem.

[PAGE 2]
(2) If any question arises before a competent authority whether any emblem is an
emblem specified in the Schedule or a colourable imitation thereof, the
competent authority shall refer the question to the Central Government and the
decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final.

General powers 6. (1) The Central Government may make such provision by rules as appears to
of Central it to be necessary, to regulate the use of the emblem in official seal that is used inGovernment to
regulate use of offices of the Central Government and State Governments and their
Emblem. organisations including diplomatic missions abroad, subject to such restrictions
and conditions as may be prescribed.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall have
powers-

(a) to notify the use of emblem on stationery, the method of printing or
embossing it on demi-official stationery by the constitutional authorities,
Ministers, Members of Parliament, Members of Legislative Assemblies, officers
of the Central Government and the State Government;

(b) to specify the design of the official seal consisting of the emblem;

(c) to restrict the display of emblem on vehicles of constitutional authorities,
foreign dignitaries, Ministers of the Central Government and the State
Government;

(d) to provide for guidelines for display of emblem on public buildings in India,
the diplomatic missions and on the buildings occupied by India's consulates
abroad;

(e) to specify conditions for the use of emblem for various other purposes
including the use for educational purposes and the armed forces personnel;

(f) to do all such things (including the specification of design of the emblem and
its use in the manner whatsoever) as the Central Government considers
necessary or expedient for the exercise of the foregoing powers.

Penalty 7(1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both or, if having been previously
convicted of an offence under this section, is again convicted of any such
offence, he shall be punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months, which
may extend to two years and with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees.

(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 4 for any wrongful
gain shall be punishable for such offence with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than six months, which may extend to two years and with fine
which may extend to five thousand rupees.

[PAGE 3]
Previous 8. No prosecution for any offence punishable under this Act shall be instituted,
sanction for
except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or of any officerprosecution
authorized in this behalf by general or special order of the Central Government.

Savings 9. Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or other
proceedings which might be brought against him under any other law for the
time being in force.

Act to have 10. The provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder shall have effect
overriding effect. notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other
enactment or instrument having effect by virtue of such enactment.

Power to make 11.(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
rules. make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers,
such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-

(a) cases and conditions regulating the use of emblem under section 4;

(b) making rules to regulate the use of the emblem in official seal of the
Government and specifying restrictions and conditions relating thereto under
sub-section (1) of section 6;

(c) the use of emblem on stationery, design of official seal consisting of
emblem and other matters under sub-section (2) of section 6;

(d) authorising officer by general or special order for giving previous sanction
for instituting prosecution under section 8; and

(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.

(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both House agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.

[PAGE 4]
THE SCHEDULE

[See section 2(b)]

STATE EMBLEM OF INDIA

DESCRIPTION AND DESIGN

The State Emblem of India is an adaptation from the Sarnath Lion Capital of Asoka which is
preserved in the Sarnath Museum. The Lion Capital has four lions mounted back to back on a circular
abacus. The frieze of the abacus is adorned with sculptures in high relief of an elephant, a galloping
horse, a bull and a lion separated by intervening Dharma Chakras. The abacus rests on a bell-shaped
lotus.

The profile of the Lion Capital showing three lions mounted on the abacus with a Dharma Chakra
in the center, a bull on the right and a galloping horse on the left, and outlines of Dharma Chakras on the
extreme right and left has been adopted as the State Emblem of India. The Bell-shaped lotus has been
omitted.

The motto "Satyameva Jayate" – Truth alone triumphs – written in Devanagari script below the
profile of the Lion Capital is part of the State Emblem of India.

The State Emblem of India shall conform to the designs as set out in Appendix I or Appendix II.

[PAGE 5]
Appendix I

Note. - This design is in simplified form and meant for reproduction in small
sizes such as for use in stationery, seals and die-printing.

[PAGE 6]
Appendix II
fn
1 ua in|
[i |
5 Cie F Ae # ees 1.
t . Le = a = . r
{ ' | F
| re
ee ail
aT ie ea ort on
1 a es _.
frit rH
Note. - This design is more detailed and meant for reproduction in bigger sizes.