[PAGE 1]
THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955

____________
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

____________

SECTIONS

1. Short title.

2. Interpretation.

ACQUISITION OF CITIZENSHIP

3. Citizenship by birth.

4. Citizenship by descent.

5. Citizenship by registration.

6. Citizenship by naturalization.

6A. Special provisions as to citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord.

6B. Special provisions as to citizenship of person covered by proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (1)
of section 2.
7. Citizenship by incorporation of territory.

OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP

7A. Registration of Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.

7B. Conferment of rights on Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.

7C. Renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India Card.

7D. Cancellation of registration as Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.

TERMINATION OF CITIZENSHIP

8. Renunciation of citizenship.

9. Termination of citizenship.

10. Deprivation of citizenship.

SUPPLEMENTAL

11. [Omitted.].

12. [Omitted.].

13. Certificate of Citizenship in case of doubt.

14. Disposal of application under sections 5, 6 and 7A.

14A. Issue of national identity cards.

15. Revision.

15A. Review.

16. Delegation of powers.

17. Offences.

[PAGE 2]
SECTIONS

18. Power to make rules.

19. [Repealed.].

[THE FIRST SCHEDULE.] [Omitted.].

THE SECOND SCHEDULE.

THE THIRD SCHEDULE.

[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.] [Omitted.].

[PAGE 3]
THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955
ACT No. 57 OF 19551

[30th December, 1955.]
An Act to provide for the acquisition and determination of Indian citizenship.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:―

1. Short title.―This Act may be called the Citizenship Act, 1955.

2. Interpretation.―(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,―

(a) “a Government in India” means the Central Government or a State Government.
2[(b) “illegal migrant” means a foreigner who has entered into India―

(i) without a valid passport or other travel documents and such other document or authority as
may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf; or

(ii) with a valid passport or other travel documents and such other document or authority as
may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf but remains therein beyond the permitted
period of time;]
3[Provided that any person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian
community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, who entered into India on or before the
31st day of December, 2014 and who has been exempted by the Central Government by or under
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 (34 of 1920)
or from the application of the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) or any rule or
order made there under, shall not be treated as illegal migrant for the purposes of this Act;]

(d) “Indian consulate” means the office of any consular officer of the Government of India where
a register of births is kept, or where there is no such office, such office as may be prescribed;

(e) “minor” means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
4[(ee) “Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder” means a person registered as an Overseas Citizen
of India Cardholder by the Central Government under section 7A;]

(f) “person” does not include any company or association or body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not;

(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
5* * * * *

(h) “undivided India” means India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, as originally
enacted.

(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person born aboard a registered ship or aircraft, or aboard an
unregistered ship or aircraft of the government of any country, shall be deemed to have been born in the
place in which the ship or aircraft was registered or, as the case may be, in that country.

(3) Any reference in this Act to the status or description of the father of a person at the time of that
person's birth shall, in relation to a person born after the death of his father, be construed as a reference to
the status or description of the father at the time of the father's death; and where that death occurred

1. This Act has been extended to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar haveli, vide Notification No. S.O. 846, dated 17-3-
1962, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii), page 517. The Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu vide
Notification No. S.O. 847, dated 17-3-1962, see ibid., and to Pondicherry with modification vide Notification No. G.S.R.
1557, dated 24-11-1962, Gazette of India, Part II, section 3(i).
2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 2, for clauses (b) and (c) (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
3. Ins. by Act 47 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-1-2020).
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 2, for clause (ee) (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
5. Omitted by Act 32 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-6-2005).

[PAGE 4]
before, and the birth occurs after, the commencement of this Act, the status or description which would
have been applicable to the father had he died after the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be
the status or description applicable to him at the time of his death.

(4) For the purposes of this Act, a person shall be deemed to be of full age if he is not a minor and of
full capacity if he is not of unsound mind.

ACQUISITION OF CITIZENSHIP
1[3. Citizenship by birth.―(1) Except as provided in sub-section (2), every person born in India―

(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 1st day of July, 1987;

(b) on or after the 1st day of July, 1987, but before the commencement of the Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 2004) and either of whose parents is a citizen of India at the time of his
birth;

(c) on or after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 2004),
where―

(i) both of his parents are citizens of India; or

(ii) one of whose parents is a citizen of India and the other is not an illegal migrant at the time
of his birth,

shall be a citizen of India by birth.

(2) A person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section if at the time of his birth―

(a) either his father or mother possesses such immunity from suits and legal process as is
accorded to an envoy of a foreign sovereign power accredited to the President of India and he or she,
as the case may be, is not a citizen of India; or

(b) his father or mother is an enemy alien and the birth occurs in a place then under occupation by
the enemy.]
4. Citizenship by descent.―2[(1) A person born outside India shall be a citizen of India by
descent,―

(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 10th day of December, 1992, if his
father is a citizen of India at the time of his birth; or

(b) on or after the 10th day of December, 1992, if either of his parents is a citizen of India at the
time of his birth:

Provided that if the father of a person referred to in clause (a) was a citizen of India by descent only,
that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section unless―

(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its occurrence or the
commencement of this Act, whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central Government,
after the expiry of the said period; or

(b) his father is, at the time of his birth, in service under a Government in India:

Provided further that if either of the parents of a person referred to in clause (b) was a citizen of India
by descent only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section, unless―

(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its occurrence or on or after the
10th day of December, 1992, whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central Government,
after the expiry of the said period; or

(b) either of his parents is, at the time of his birth, in service under a Government in India:

1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 3, for section 3 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).

[PAGE 5]
Provided also that on or after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003
(6 of 2004), a person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section, unless his birth is registered at
an Indian consulate in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed,―

(i) within one year of its occurrence or the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act,
2003(6 of 2004), whichever is later; or

(ii) with the permission of the Central Government, after the expiry of the said period:
Provided also that no such birth shall be registered unless the parents of such person declare, in such
form and in such manner as may be prescribed, that the minor does not hold the passport of another
country.
(1A) A minor who is a citizen of India by virtue of this section and is also a citizen of any other
country shall cease to be a citizen of India if he does not renounce the citizenship or nationality of another
country within six months of attaining full age.]
(2) If the Central Government so directs, a birth shall be deemed for the purposes of this section to
have been registered with its permission, notwithstanding that its permission was not obtained before the
registration.
(3) For the purposes of the proviso to sub-section (1), 1[any person] born outside undivided India who
was, or was deemed to be, a citizen of India at the commencement of the Constitution shall be deemed to
be a citizen of India by descent only.
5. Citizenship by registration.―2[(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such other
conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Central Government may, on an application made in
this behalf, register as a citizen of India any person not being an illegal migrant who is not already such
citizen by virtue of the Constitution or of any other provision of this Act if he belongs to any of the
following categories, namely:―
(a) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in India for seven years before making an
application for registration;
(b) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in any country or place outside undivided
India;
(c) a person who is married to a citizen of India and is ordinarily resident in India for seven
years before making an application for registration;
(d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India;
(e) a person of full age and capacity whose parents are registered as citizens of India under
clause (a) of this sub-section or sub-section (1) of section 6;
(f) a person of full age and capacity who, or either of his parents, was earlier citizen of
independent India, and 3[is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months] immediately before making
an application for registration;
(g) a person of full age and capacity who has been registered as an 4[Overseas Citizen of India
Cardholder] for five years, and who 5[is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months] before making
an application for registration.
Explanation 1.―For the purposes of clauses (a) and (c), an applicant shall be deemed to be ordinarily
resident in India if―
(i) he has resided in India throughout the period of twelve months immediately before making an
application for registration; and
(ii) he has resided in India during the eight years immediately preceding the said period of twelve
months for a period of not less than six years.

1. Subs. by Act 39 of 1992, s. 2, for “any male person”.
2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 5, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 3, for “has been residing in India for one year” (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “Overseas Citizen of India” (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “has been residing in India for one year” (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).

[PAGE 6]
Explanation 2.―For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin
if he, or either of his parents, was born in undivided India or in such other territory which became part of
India after the 15th day of August, 1947.]
1[(1A) The Central Government, if it is satisfied that special circumstances exist, may after recording
the circumstances in writing, relax the period of twelve months, specified in clauses (f) and (g) and clause
(i) of Explanation 1 of sub-section (1), up to a maximum of thirty days which may be in different breaks.]

(2) No person being of full age shall be registered as a citizen of India under sub-section (1) until he
has taken the oath of allegiance in the form specified in the Second Schedule.

(3) No person who has renounced, or has been deprived of, his Indian citizenship or whose Indian
citizenship has terminated, under this Act shall be registered as a citizen of India under sub-section (1)
except by order of the Central Government.

(4) The Central Government may, if satisfied that there are special circumstances justifying such
registration, cause any minor to be registered as a citizen of India.

(5) A person registered under this section shall be a citizen of India by registration as from the date on
which he is so registered; and a person registered under the provisions of clause (b)(ii) of article 6 or
article 8 of the Constitution shall be deemed to be a citizen of India by registration as from the
commencement of the Constitution or the date on which he was so registered, whichever may be later.
2[(6) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary to grant
exemption from the residential requirement under clause (c) of sub-section (1) to any person or a class of
persons, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant such exemption.].

6. Citizenship by naturalisation.―(1) Where an application is made in the prescribed manner by
any person of full age and capacity 3[not being an illegal migrant] for the grant of a certificate of
naturalisation to him, the Central Government may, if satisfied that the applicant is qualified for
naturalisation under the provisions of the Third Schedule, grant to him a certificate of naturalisation:

Provided that, if in the opinion of the Central Government, the applicant is a person who has rendered
distinguished service to the cause of science, philosophy, art, literature, world peace or human progress
generally, it may waive all or any of the conditions specified in the Third Schedule.

(2) The person to whom a certificate of naturalisation is granted under sub-section (1) shall, on taking
the oath of allegiance in the form specified in the Second Schedule, be a citizen of India by naturalisation
as from the date on which that certificate is granted.
4[6A. Special provisions as to citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord.―(1) For the
purposes of this section―

(a) “Assam” means the territories included in the State of Assam immediately before the
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985);

(b) “detected to be a foreigner” means detected to be a foreigner in accordance with the
provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 by a
Tribunal constituted under the said Order;

(c) “specified territory” means the territories included in Bangladesh immediately before the
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985);

(d) a person shall be deemed to be Indian origin, if he, or either of his parents or any of his
grandparents was born in undivided India;

1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 5 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “who is not a citizen of a country specified in the First Schedule” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
4. Ins. by Act 65 of 1985, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-12-1985).

[PAGE 7]
(e) a person shall be deemed to have been detected to be a foreigner on the date on which a
Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 submits its opinion to the effect
that he is a foreigner to the officer or authority concerned.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), all persons of Indian origin who came before
the lst day of January, 1966 to Assam from the specified territory (including such of those whose names
were included in the electoral rolls used for the purposes of the General Election to the House of the
People held in 1967) and who have been ordinarily resident in Assam since the dates of their entry into
Assam shall be deemed to be citizens of India as from the lst day of January, 1966.

(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), every person of Indian origin who―

(a) came to Assam on or after the lst day of January, 1966 but before the 25th day of March, 1971
from the specified territory; and

(b) has, since the date of his entry into Assam, been ordinarily resident in Assam; and

(c) has been detected to be a foreigner;

shall register himself in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf under
section 18 with such authority (hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the registering authority) as may
be specified in such rules and if his name is included in any electoral roll for any Assembly or
Parliamentary constituency in force on the date of such detection, his name shall be deleted therefrom.

Explanation.―In the case of every person seeking registration under this sub-section, the opinion of
the Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 holding such person to be a
foreigner, shall be deemed to be sufficient proof of the requirement under clause (c) of this sub-section
and if any question arises as to whether such person complies with any other requirement under this subsection, the registering authority shall,―

(i) if such opinion contains a finding with respect to such other requirement, decide the question
in conformity with such finding;

(ii) if such opinion does not contain a finding with respect to such other requirement, refer the
question to a Tribunal constituted under the said Order hang jurisdiction in accordance with such
rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf under section 18 and decide the question in
conformity with the opinion received on such reference.

(4) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall have, as from the date on which he has been
detected to be a foreigner and till the expiry of a period of ten years from that date, the same rights and
obligations as a citizen of India (including the right to obtain a passport under the Passports Act, 1967 (15
of 1967) and the obligations connected therewith), but shall not entitled to have his name included in any
electoral roll for any Assembly or Parliamentary constituency at any time before the expiry of the said
period of ten years.

(5) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be a citizen of India for all purposes
as from the date of expiry of a period of ten years from the date on which he has been detected to be a
foreigner.

(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8―

(a) if any person referred to in sub-section (2) submits in the prescribed manner and form and to
the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985), a declaration that he does not wish to be a citizen of India,
such person shall not be deemed to have become a citizen of India under that sub-section;

(b) if any person referred to in sub-section (3) submits in the prescribed manner and form and to
the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Citizenship
(Amendment) Act, 1985(65 of 1985), or from the date on which he has been detected to be a
foreigner, whichever is later, a declaration that he does not wish to be governed by the provisions of
that sub-section and sub-sections (4) and (5), it shall not be necessary for such person to register
himself under sub-section (3).

[PAGE 8]
Explanation.―Where a person required to file a declaration under this sub-section does not have the
capacity to enter into a contract, such declaration may be filed on his behalf by any person competent
under the law for the time being in force to act on his behalf.

(7) Nothing in sub-sections (2) to (6) shall apply in relation to any person―

(a) who, immediately before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65
of 1985), is a citizen of India;

(b) who was expelled from India before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act,
1985, under the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946).

(8) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the provisions of this section shall have
effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force.]
1[6B. Special provisions as to citizenship of person covered by proviso to clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 2.—(1) The Central Government or an authority specified by it in this behalf may,
subject to such conditions, restrictions and manner as may be prescribed, on an application made in this
behalf, grant a certificate of registration or certificate of naturalisation to a person referred to in the
proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2.

(2) Subject to fulfillment of the conditions specified in section 5 or the qualifications for
naturalisation under the provisions of the Third Schedule, a person granted the certificate of registration
or certificate of naturalisation under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a citizen of India from the date
of his entry into India.

(3) On and from the date of commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, any
proceeding pending against a person under this section in respect of illegal migration or citizenship shall
stand abated on conferment of citizenship to him:

Provided that such person shall not be disqualified for making application for citizenship under this
section on the ground that the proceeding is pending against him and the Central Government or authority
specified by it in this behalf shall not reject his application on that ground if he is otherwise found
qualified for grant of citizenship under this section:

Provided further that the person who makes the application for citizenship under this section shall not
be deprived of his rights and privileges to which he was entitled on the date of receipt of his application
on the ground of making such application.

(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to tribal area of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram or Tripura as
included in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution and the area covered under “The Inner Line” notified
under the Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation, 1873 (Reg. 5 of 1873).]

7. Citizenship by incorporation of territory.―If any territory becomes a part of India, the Central
Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, specify the persons who shall be citizens of
India by reason of their connection with that territory; and those persons shall be citizens of India as from
the date to be specified in the order.
2[OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP
3[7A. Registration of Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.―(1) The Central Government may,
subject to such conditions, restrictions and manner as may be prescribed, on an application made in this
behalf, register as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder―

(a) any person of full age and capacity,―

(i) who is a citizen of another country, but was a citizen of India at the time of, or at any time
after the commencement of the Constitution; or

1. Ins. by Act 47 of 2019, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10-1-2020).
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 7 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 4, for sections 7A, 7B, 7C and 7D (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).

[PAGE 9]
(ii) who is a citizen of another country, but was eligible to become a citizen of India at the
time of the commencement of the Constitution; or

(iii) who is a citizen of another country, but belonged to a territory that became part of India
after the 15th day of August, 1947; or

(iv) who is a child or a grandchild or a great grandchild of such a citizen; or

(b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in clause (a); or

(c) a person, who is a minor child, and whose both parents are citizens of India or one of the
parents is a citizen of India; or

(d) spouse of foreign origin of a citizen of India or spouse of foreign origin of an Overseas
Citizen of India Cardholder registered under section 7A and whose marriage has been registered and
subsisted for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of
the application under this section:

Provided that for the eligibility for registration as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, such
spouse shall be subjected to prior security clearance by a competent authority in India:

Provided further that no person, who or either of whose parents or grandparents or great grandparents
is or had been a citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, shall be eligible for registration as an Overseas Citizen of
India Cardholder under this sub-section.

(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the date from which
the existing persons of Indian Origin Cardholders shall be deemed to be Overseas Citizens of India
Cardholders.

Explanation.―For the purposes of this sub-section, “Persons of Indian Origin Cardholders” means
the persons registered as such under notification number 26011/4/98 F.I., dated the 19th August, 2002,
issued by the Central Government in this regard.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government may, if it is
satisfied that special circumstances exist, after recording the circumstances in writing, register a person as
an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.

7B. Conferment of rights on Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.―(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder
shall be entitled to such rights, other than the rights specified under sub-section (2), as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.

(2) An Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder shall not be entitled to the rights conferred on a citizen
of India―

(a) under article 16 of the Constitution with regard to equality of opportunity in matters of public
employment;

(b) under article 58 of the Constitution for election as President;

(c) under article 66 of the Constitution for election as Vice-President;

(d) under article 124 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court;

(e) under article 217 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the High Court;

(f) under section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) in regard to
registration as a voter;

(g) under sections 3 and 4 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) with regard
to the eligibility for being a member of the House of the People or of the Council of States, as the
case may be;

[PAGE 10]
(h) under sections 5, 5A and section 6 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951)
with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative
Council, as the case may be, of a State;

(i) for appointment to public services and posts in connection with affairs of the Union or of any
State except for appointment in such services and posts as the Central Government may, by special
order in that behalf, specify.

(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.

7C. Renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India Card.―(1) If any Overseas Citizen of India
Cardholder of full age and capacity makes in prescribed manner a declaration renouncing the Card
registering him as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, the declaration shall be registered by the
Central Government, and upon such registration, that person shall cease to be an Overseas Citizen of
India Cardholder.

(2) Where a person ceases to be an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder under sub-section (1), the
spouse of foreign origin of that person, who has obtained Overseas Citizen of India Card under clause (d)
of sub-section (1) of section 7A, and every minor child of that person registered as an Overseas Citizen of
India Cardholder shall thereupon cease to be an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.

7D. Cancellation of registration as Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.―The Central
Government may, by order, cancel the registration granted under sub-section (1) of section 7A, if it is
satisfied that―

(a) the registration as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder was obtained by means of fraud,
false representation or the concealment of any material fact; or

(b) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has shown disaffection towards the Constitution, as
by law established; or

(c) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has, during any war in which India may be engaged,
unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy or been engaged in, or associated with, any
business or commercial activity that was to his knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist an
enemy in that war; or

(d) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has, within five years after registration under
sub-section (1) of section 7A, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of not less than two years;
or
1[(da) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has violated any of the provisions of this Act or
provisions of any other law for time being in force as may be specified by the Central Government in
the notification published in the Official Gazette; or;]

(e) it is necessary so to do in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of
India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country, or in the interests of the general public; or

(f) the marriage of an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, who has obtained such Card under
clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 7A,―

(i) has been dissolved by a competent court of law or otherwise; or

(ii) has not been dissolved but, during the subsistence of such marriage, he has solemnised
marriage with any other person.]]
1[Provided that no order under this section shall be passed unless the Overseas Citizen of
India Cardholder has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.]

1. Ins. by Act 47 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 10-1-2020).

[PAGE 11]
TERMINATION OF CITIZENSHIP
8. Renunciation of citizenship.―(1) If any citizen of India of full age and capacity, 1***, makes in
the prescribed manner a declaration renouncing his Indian Citizenship, the declaration shall be registered
by the prescribed authority; and, upon such registration, that person shall cease to be a citizen of India:

Provided that if any such declaration is made during any war in which India may be engaged,
registration thereof shall be withheld until the Central Government otherwise directs.
(2) Where 2[a person] ceases to be a citizen of India under sub-section (1), every minor child of that
person shall thereupon cease to be a citizen of India:
Provided that any such child may, within one year after attaining full age, make a declaration 3[in the
prescribed form and manner] that he wishes to resume Indian citizenship and shall thereupon again
become a citizen of India.
4* * * * *

9. Termination of citizenship.―(1) Any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registration
otherwise voluntarily acquires, or has at any time between the 26th January, 1950 and the commencement
of this Act, voluntarily acquired, the citizenship of another country shall, upon such acquisition or, as the
case may be, such commencement, cease to be a citizen of India:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a citizen of India who, during any war in
which India may be engaged, voluntarily acquires the citizenship of another country, until the Central
Government otherwise directs.
(2) If any question arises as to whether, when or how any 5[citizen of India] has acquired the
citizenship of another country, it shall be determined by such authority, in such manner, and having
regard to such rules of evidence, as may be prescribed in this behalf.

10. Deprivation of citizenship.―(1) A citizen of India who is such by naturalisation or by virtue
only of clause (c) of article 5 of the Constitution or by registration otherwise than under clause (b)(ii) of
article 6 of the Constitution or clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 5 of this Act, shall cease to be a
citizen of India, if he is deprived of that citizenship by an order of the Central Government under this
section.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Central Government may, by order, deprive any such
citizen of Indian citizenship, if it is satisfied that―

(a) the registration or certificate of naturalisation was obtained by means of fraud, false
representation or the concealment of any material fact; or

(b) that citizen has shown himself by act or speech to be disloyal or disaffected towards the
Constitution of India as by law established; or

(c) that citizen has, during any war in which India may be engaged, unlawfully traded or
communicated with an enemy or been engaged in, or associated with, any business that was to his
knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist an enemy in that war; or

(d) that citizen has, within five years after registration or naturalisation, been sentenced in any
country to imprisonment for a term of not less than two years; or

(e) that citizen has been ordinarily resident out of India for a continuous period of seven years,
and during that period, has neither been at any time a student of any educational institution in a
country outside India or in the service of a Government in India or of an international organisation of

1. The words “who is also a citizen or national of another country” omitted by Act 6 of 2004, s. 8 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 1992, s. 3, for “a male person” (w.e.f. 10-12-1987).
3. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 8 (w.e.f. 3-12-2014).
4. Omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “person” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).

[PAGE 12]
which India is a member, not registered annually in the prescribed manner at an Indian consulate his
intention to retain his citizenship of India.

(3) The Central Government shall not deprive a person of citizenship under this section unless it is
satisfied that it is not conducive to the public good that person should continue to be a citizen of India.

(4) Before making an order under this section, the Central Government shall give the person against
whom the order is proposed to be made notice in writing informing him of the ground on which it is
proposed to be made and, if the order is proposed to be made on any of the grounds specified in subsection (2) other than clause (e) thereof, of his right, upon making application therefore in the prescribed
manner, to have his case referred to a committee of inquiry under this section.

(5) If the order is proposed to be made against a person on any of the grounds specified in sub-section
(2) other than clause (e) thereof and that person so applies in the prescribed manner, the Central
Government shall, and in any other case it may, refer the case to a Committee of Inquiry consisting of a
chairman (being a person who has for at least ten years held a judicial office) and two other members
appointed by the Central Government in this behalf.

(6) The Committee of Inquiry shall, on such reference, hold the inquiry in such manner as may be
prescribed and submit its report to the Central Government; and the Central Government shall ordinarily
be guided by such report in making an order under this section.

SUPPLEMENTAL

11. [Commonwealth citizenship.]Omitted by Act The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, (6 of 2004),
s. 10 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).

12. [Power to confer rights of Indian citizen or citizens of certain country.] Omitted by s. 10, ibid.
(w.e.f. 3-12-2004).

13. Certificate of Citizenship in case of doubt.―The Central Government may, in such cases as it
thinks fit, certify that a person with respect to whose citizenship of India a doubt exists, is a citizen of
India; and a certificate issued under this section shall, unless it is proved that it was obtained by means of
fraud, false representation or concealment of any material fact, be conclusive evidence that person was
such a citizen on the date thereof, but without prejudice to any evidence that he was such a citizen at an
earlier date.

14. Disposal of application under sections 5, 6 and 7A.―(1) The prescribed authority or the
Central Government may, in its discretion, grant or refuse an application under 1[sections 5, 6 and
7A] and shall not be required to assign any reasons for such grant or refusal.

(2) Subject to the provisions of section l5 the decision of the prescribed authority or the Central
Government on any such application as aforesaid shall be final and shall not be called in question in any
court.
2[14A. Issue of national identity cards.―(1) The Central Government may compulsorily register
every citizen of India and issue national identity card to him.

(2) The Central Government may maintain a National Register of Indian Citizens and for that purpose
establish a National Registration Authority.

(3) On and from the date of commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 2004),
the Registrar General, India, appointed under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Registration of Births and
Deaths Act, 1969 (18 of 1969) shall act as the National Registration Authority and he shall function as the
Registrar General of Citizen Registration.

(4) The Central Government may appoint such other officers and staff as may be required to assist the
Registrar General of Citizen Registration in discharging his functions and responsibilities.

1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 11, for “sections 5 and 6” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).

[PAGE 13]
(5) The procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of India shall be such as
may be prescribed.]

15. Revision.―(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under this Act by the prescribed authority
or any officer or other authority (other than the Central Government) may, within a period of thirty days
from the date of the order, make an application to the Central Government for a revision of that order:

Provided that the Central Government may entertain the application after the expiry of the said period
of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the
application in time.

(2) On receipt of any such application under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, after
considering the application of the aggrieved person and any report thereon which the officer or authority
making the order may submit, make such order in relation to the application as it deems fit, and the
decision of the Central Government shall be final.
1[15A. Review.―(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Central Government, may,
within thirty days from the date of such order, make an application for review of such order:

Provided that the Central Government may entertain an application after the expiry of the said period
of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the
application in time:

Provided further that an application for a review of an order passed in terms of the provisions of
section 14A shall be disposed of in the manner provided for in the procedure as may be laid down under
clause (ia) of sub-section (2) of section 18.

(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, make such order
as it deems fit, and the decision of the Central Government on such review shall be final.]

16. Delegation of powers.―The Central Government may, by order, direct that any power which is
conferred on it by any of the provisions of this Act other than those of section 10 and section 18 shall, in
such circumstances and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercisable also
by such officer or authority as may be so specified.

17. Offences.―Any person who, for the purpose of procuring anything to be done or not to be done
under this Act, knowingly makes any representation which is false in a material particular shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 2[five years], or 3[with fine which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees], or with both.

18. Power to make rules.―(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for―

(a) the registration of anything required or authorised under this Act to be registered, and the
conditions and restrictions in regard to such registration;
4[(aa) the form and manner in which a declaration under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be
made;];

(b) the forms to be used and the registers to be maintained under this Act;

(c) the administration and taking of oaths of allegiance under this Act and the time within which
and the manner in which, such oaths shall be taken and recorded;

(d) the giving of any notice required or authorised to be given by any person under this Act;

1. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “six months” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004)
3. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “with fine” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004)..
4. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).

[PAGE 14]
(e) the cancellation of the registration of, and the cancellation and amendment of certificates of
naturalisation relating to, persons deprived of citizenship under this Act, and the delivering up of such
certificates for those purposes;
1[(ee) the manner and form in which and the authority to whom declarations referred to in clauses
(a) and (b) of sub-section (6) of section 6A shall be submitted and other matters connected with such
declarations;]
2[(eei) the conditions, restrictions and manner for granting certificate of registration or certificate
of naturalisation under sub-section (1) of section 6B;]
3[(eea) the conditions and the manner subject to which a person may be registered as an Overseas
Citizen of India Cardholder under sub-section (1) of section 7A;

(eeb) the manner of making declaration for renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India Card under
sub-section (1) of section 7C;]

(f) the registration at Indian consulates of the births and deaths of persons of any class or
description born or dying outside India;

(g) the levy and collection of fees in respect of applications, registrations, declarations and
certificates under this Act, in respect of the taking of an oath of allegiance, and in respect of the
supply of certified or other copies of documents;

(h) the authority to determine the question of acquisition of citizenship of another country, the
procedure to be followed by such authority and rules of evidence relating to such cases;

(i) the procedure to be followed by the committees of inquiry appointed under section 10 and the
conferment on such committees of any of the powers, rights and privileges of civil courts;
4[(ia) the procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of India under subsection (5) of section 14A;]

(j) the manner in which applications for revision may be made and the procedure to be followed
by the Central Government in dealing with such applications; and

(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed under the Act.

(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Government may provide that a breach thereof
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.

5[Provided that any rule made in respect of a matter specified in clause (ia) of sub-section (2) may
provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.]

6[(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made before each
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of session, immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.]

19. [Repeals.] [Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 1960 (58 of 1960), s. 2 and the First
Schedule.]

1. Ins. by Act 65 of 1985, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7-12-1985).
2. Ins. by Act 47 of 2019, s. 5 (w.e.f. 10-1-2020).
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 5 (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
4. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 15 (w.e.f. 7-12-1985).
5. The proviso ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
6. Subs. by Act 4 of 1986, s. 2 and the Schedule for sub-section (4) (w.e.f. 15-5-1986).

[PAGE 15]
[THE FIRST SCHEDULE.] [Omitted by Act the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 2004), s.
16 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).]

[PAGE 16]
1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE

[See sections 5(2) and 6(2)]

OATH OF ALLEGIANCE

I, A. B. _________ do solemnly affirm (or swear) that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of India as by law established, and that I will faithfully observe the laws of India and fulfill
my duties as a citizen of India.]

1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 17, for the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).

[PAGE 17]
THE THIRD SCHEDULE

[See section 6(1)]

QUALIFICATIONS FOR NATURALISATION

The qualifications for naturalisation of a person 1*** are―

(a) that he is not a subject or citizen of any country where citizens of India are prevented by law
or practice of that country from becoming subjects or citizens of that country by naturalisation;

(b) that, if he is a citizen of any country, 2***;

(c) that he has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in India or partly the
one and partly the other, throughout the period of twelve months immediately preceding the date of
the application;

3[Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied that special circumstances exist, it may,
after recording the circumstances in writing, relax the period of twelve months up to a maximum of
thirty days which may be in different breaks.]
(d) that during the 4[fourteen years] immediately preceding the said period of twelve months, he
has either resided in India or been in the service of a Government in India, or partly the one and partly
the other, for periods amounting in the aggregate to not less than 5[eleven years];
6[Provided that for the person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian
community in Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, the aggregate period of residence or service of
Government in India as required under this clause shall be read as “not less than five years” in place
of “not less than eleven years”.]

(e) that he is of good character;

(f) that he has an adequate knowledge of a language specified in the Eighth Schedule to the
Constitution; and

(g) that in the event of a certificate of naturalisation being granted to him, he intends to reside in
India, or to enter into, or continue in, service under a Government in India or under an international
organisation of which India is a member or under a society, company or body of persons established
in India:

Provided that the Central Government may, if in the special circumstances of any particular case it
thinks fit,―

(i) allow a continuous period of twelve months ending not more than six months before the date
of the application to be reckoned, for the purposes of clause (c) above, as if it had immediately
preceded that date;
(ii) allow periods of residence or service earlier than 7[fifteen years] before the date of the
application to be reckoned in computing the aggregate mentioned in clause (d) above.

1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 18, for “who is not a citizen of a country specified in the First Schedule” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “he has renounced the citizenship of that country in accordance with the law therein in force in
that behalf and has notified such renunciation to the Central Government” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
3. The proviso ins. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 6 (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
4. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 18, for “twelve years” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
5. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “nine years” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
6. The proviso ins. by Act 47 of 2019, s. 6 (w.e.f. 10-1-2020).
7. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 18, for “thirteen years” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).

[PAGE 18]
[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.] Omitted by the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2005 (32 of 2005), s. 5
(w.e.f. 28-6-2005).

[PAGE 19]
नागिरकता अिधिनयम, 1955
(1955 का अिधिनयम संख्यांक 57)1
[30 िदसम् बर, 1955]
भारतीय नागिरकता के अजर्न और पयर्वसान के िलए
उपबन्ध करने के िलए
अिधिनयम
भारण गणराज्य के छठे वषर् मᱶ संसद् ᳇ारा िनम्निलिखत रूप मᱶ यह अिधिनयिमत हो :––
1. संिक्षप् त नाम––यह अिधिनयम नागिरकता अिधिनयम, 1955 कहा जा सकेगा ।
2. िनवर्चन––(1) इस अिधिनयम मᱶ जब तक िक संदभर् से अन्यथा अपेिक्षत न हो,––
(क) “भारत मᱶ की िकसी सरकार” से केन्दर्ीय सरकार या कोई राज्य सरकार अिभपर्ेत है;
2[(ख) “अवैध पर्वासी” से ऐसा कोई िवदेशी अिभपर्ेत है िजसने भारत मᱶ,––
(i) िकसी िविधमान् य पासपोटर् या अन् य यातर्ा दस्तावेज और ऐसे अन्य दस्तावेज या पर्ािधकार के िबना,
जो इस िनिमᱫ िकसी िविध ᳇ारा या उसके अधीन िविहत िकया जाए, पर्वेश िकया है;
(ii) िकसी िविधमान् य पासपोटर् या अन् य यातर्ा दस् तावेज और ऐसे अन्य दस्तावेज या पर्ािधकार के साथ,
जो इस िनिमᱫ िकसी िविध ᳇ारा या उसके अधीन िविहत िकया जाए, पर्वेश िकया है िकन् तु वह वहां अनुज्ञात
अविध के पश्चात् रहता है;]
(घ) “भारतीय कान् सलेट” से भारत सरकार के िकसी कौन्सलीय आिफसर का वह कायार्लय जहां जन्म-रिजस्टर
रखा जाता है, या जहां ऐसा कोई कायार्लय न हो, वहां ऐसा कायार्लय, जैसा िविहत िकया जाए, अिभपर्ेत है;
(ङ) “अपर्ाप्तवय” से ऐसा व्यिक्त अिभपर्ेत है िजसने अठारह वषर् की आयु पूरी नहᱭ की है;
3[(ङङ) “भारत का काडर् धारक िवदेशी नागिरक” से ऐसा व्यिक् त अिभपर्ेत है जो धारा 7क के अधीन केन्दर्ीय
सरकार ᳇ारा भारत के काडर् धारक िवदेशी नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकृत है;]
(च) “व्यिक्त” के अन्तगर्त कोई कम् पनी या संगम या व् यिष्ट-िनकाय नहᱭ आता चाहे वह िनगिमत हो या न हो;
(छ) “िविहत” से इस अिधिनयम के अधीन बनाए गए िनयमᲂ ᳇ारा िविहत अिभपर्ेत है;
4* * * * * * *
(ज) “अिवभक् त भारत” से वह भारत अिभपर्ेत है जो मूल रूप मᱶ यथा अिधिनयिमत गवनर्मᱶट ऑफ इंिडया
ऐक्ट, 1935 मᱶ पिरभािषत है ।
(2) इस अिधिनयम के पर्योजनᲂ के िलए यह समझा जाएगा िक िकसी रिजस्टर्ीकृत पोत या वायुयान के फलक पर अथवा
िकसी देश की सरकार के िकसी अरिजस् टर्ीकृत पोत या वायुयान के फलक पर पैदा हुआ व्यिक्त, यथािस्थित, उस स्थान मᱶ, जहां वह पोत
या वायुयान रिजस्टर्ीकृत है, या उस देश मᱶ पैदा हुआ था ।
(3) इस अिधिनयम मᱶ िकसी व्यिक्त के जन्म के समय उस व्यिक्त के िपता की पर्ािस् थित या अिभवणर्न के पर्ित िकसी िनदᱷश
का अथर् ऐसे व्यिक्त के सम् बन् ध मᱶ, जो अपने िपता की मृत्यु के पश्चात् पैदा हुआ है, यह लगाया जाएगा िक वह िनदᱷश िपता की मृत्यु के
समय िपता की पर्ािस् थित या अिभवणर्न के पर्ित है; और जहां िक वह मृत्यु इस अिधिनयम के पर्ारम् भ् ा से पूवर् हुई थी और जन्म इस
अिधिनयम के पर्ारम् भ के पश्चात् हुआ है, वहां वह पर्ािस्थित या अिभवणर्न, जो िपता को उस दशा मᱶ लागू होता िजसमᱶ िक उसकी मृत्यु
इस अिधिनयम के पर्ारम्भ के पश् चात् हुई हो तो, उसकी मृत्यु के समय उसे लागू पर्ािस्थित या अिभवणर्न समझा जाएगा ।
(4) इस अिधिनयम के पर्योजनᲂ के िलए यह समझा जाएगा िक कोई व्यिक्त वय: पर्ाप्त है यिद वह अपर्ाप् तवय नहᱭ है, और
पूणर् सामथ् यर् का है यिद वह िवकृतिचत नहᱭ है ।

1 इस अिधिनयम का िवस् तार, दादरा और नागर हवेली संघ राज् यक्षेतर् पर अिधसूचना सं०का०आ० 846, तारीख 7-3-1962, भारत का राजपतर्, असाधारण, भाग 2, खंड
3 (ii), पृ० 517 ᳇ारा, गोवा, दमन और दीव संघ राज्य᭯ ोतर् पर अिधसूचना सं०का०आ० 847, तारीख 17-3-1962 भारत का राजपतर्, असाधारण, भाग 2, खंड 3(ii)
᳇ारा, और उपान्तर सिहत पांिडचेरी पर अिधसूचना सं० सा०का०िन० 1557, तारीख 24-11-1962 भारत का राजपतर्, भाग 2, खंड 3(i), पृ० 1886 ᳇ारा िकया गया ।
2 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 2 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
3 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 2 ᳇ारा अंत:स् थािपत ।
4 2005 के अिधिनयम सं० 32 की धारा 2 ᳇ारा (28-06-2005 से) लोप िकया गया ।

[PAGE 20]
1[3. जन्म ᳇ारा नागिरकता––(1) उपधारा (2) मᱶ जैसा उपबंिधत है उसके िसवाय, ऐसा पर्त् येक व्यिक्त जन् म ᳇ारा भारत का
नागिरक होगा िजसका जन्म भारत मᱶ,––
(क) 26 जनवरी, 1950 को या उसके पश्चात् िकन्तु 1 जुलाई, 1987 के पूवर् हुआ है;
(ख) 1 जुलाई, 1987 को या उसके पश्चात् िकन् तु नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 2003 के पर्ारंभ के पूवर् हुआ है
और िजसके माता या िपता मᱶ से कोई उसके जन्म के समय भारत का नागिरक है;
(ग) नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 2003 के पर्ारंभ पर या उसके पश्चात्––
(i) जहां उसके माता या िपता दोनᲂ भारत के नागिरक हᱹ; या
(ii) िजसके माता-िपता मᱶ से एक भारत का नागिरक है और दूसरा उसके जन्म के समय पर अवैध पर्वासी
नहᱭ है ।
(2) कोई व्यिक्त इस धारा के आधार पर भारत का नागिरक नहᱭ होगा यिद उसके जन्म के समय,––
(क) उसके िपता या उसकी माता को, वादᲂ और वैध आदेिशका मᱶ ऐसी उन् मुिक्त पर्ाप्त है जैसी भारत के राष् टर्पित
को पर्त्याियत िकसी पर्भुत्व संपन्न िवदेशी शिक्त के दूत को दी जाती है और वह, यथािस्थित, भारत का/की नागिरक नहᱭ
है; या
(ख) उसका िपता या उसकी माता कोई अन् य देशीय शतर्ु है और उसका जन् म िकसी ऐसे स्थान पर होता है जो उस
समय शतर्ु के अिधभोग के अधीन है ।]
4. अवजनन ᳇ारा नागिरकता––2[(1) भारत के बाहर,––
(क) 26 जनवरी, 1950 को या उसके पश्चात् िकन् तु 10 िदसंबर, 1992 के पूवर् पैदा हुआ कोई व्यिक्त अवजनन ᳇ारा
भारत का नागिरक होगा, यिद उसका िपता उसके जन्म के समय भारत का नागिरक है; या
(ख) 10 िदसंबर, 1992 को या उसके पश्चात् पैदा हुआ कोई व्यिक् त अवजनन ᳇ारा भारत का नागिरक होगा, यिद
उसके िपता/माता मᱶ से कोई उसके जन्म के समय भारत का नागिरक है :
परन्तु यिद खंड (क) मᱶ िनिदष्ट िकसी व्यिक्त का िपता केवल अवजनन ᳇ारा भारत का नागिरक था तो वह व्यिक्त इस धारा
के आधार पर भारत का नागिरक तब के िसवाय नहᱭ होगा,––
(क) जब िक उसके जन्म का रिजस्टर्ीकरण िकसी भारतीय कौन्सलेट मᱶ जन्म होने से या इस अिधिनयम के पर्ांरभ से,
इनमᱶ से जो भी पश्चात्वतᱮ हो, एक वषर् के अंदर या कᱶदर्ीय सरकार की अनुज्ञा से उक्त कालाविध के अवसान के पश्चात् कर
िदया गया है; या
(ख) उसका िपता उसके जन्म के समय भारत मᱶ िकसी सरकार के अधीन सेवा मᱶ है :
परन्तु यह और िक यिद खंड (ख) मᱶ िनिदष् ट िकसी व्यिक्त के िपता-माता मᱶ से कोई केवल अवजनन ᳇ारा भारत का नागिरक
था तो वह व्यिक् त इस धारा के आधार पर भारत का नागिरक तब के िसवाय नहᱭ होगा जब िक,––
(क) उसके जन्म का रिजस्टर्ीकरण िकसी भारतीय कौन्सलेट मᱶ जन्म होने से या 10 िदसंबर, 1992 को या उसके
पश्चात्, इनमᱶ से जो पश्चात्वतᱮ हो, एक वषर् के अंदर या कᱶदर्ीय सरकार की अनुज्ञा से उक्त कालाविध के अवसान के पश्चात्
कर िदया गया है; अथवा
(ख) उसके िपता-माता मᱶ से कोई, उसके जन्म के समय, भारत मᱶ िकसी सरकार के अधीन सेवा मᱶ है :
परंतु यह भी िक नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 2003 के पर्ारंभ पर या उसके पश्चात् कोई व्यिक्त इस धारा के आधार
पर तब के िसवाय भारत या नागिरक नहᱭ होगा जब िक उसके जन्म का रिजस्टर्ीकरण िकसी भारतीय कौन्सलेट मᱶ ऐसे पर्रूप मᱶ और
ऐसी रीित से, जो िविहत की जाए,––
(i) उसका जन् म होने से या नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 2003 के पर्ारंभ से, जो भी पश्चात्वतᱮ हो, एक वषर्
के अंदर; या
(ii) कᱶदर्ीय सरकार की अनुज्ञा से उक्त कालाविध की समािप्त के पश्चात्,
कर िदया गया है :

1 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 3 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
2 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 4 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।

[PAGE 21]
परन्तु यह भी िक िकसी ऐसे जन्म को तब के िसवाय रिजस् टर्ीकृत नहᱭ िकया जाएगा जब िक ऐसे व्यिक्त का/की िपता या
माता ऐसे पर्रूप मᱶ और ऐसी रीित से जो िविहत की जाए, यह घोषणा करता/करती है िक अपर्ाप् तवय दूसरे देश का पासपोटर् धारण नहᱭ
करता है ।
(1क) कोई अपर्ाप्तवय, जो इस धारा के आधार पर भारत का नागिरक है और िकसी अन् य देश का भी नागिरक है, भारत का
नागिरक नहᱭ रहेगा यिद वह पूणर् वय: पर्ाप् त करने के छह मास के भीतर दूसरे देश की नागिरकता या राष् टर्ीयता का त् यजन नहᱭ करता
है ।]
(2) यिद केन्दर्ीय सरकार ऐसा िनदेश देती है, तो इस बात के होते हुए भी िक रिजस्टर्ीकरण से पूवर् उसकी अनुज्ञा अिभपर्ाप्त
नहᱭ की गई थी, यह समझा जाएगा िक कोई जन् म इस धारा के पर्योजनᲂ के िलए उसकी अनुज्ञा से रिजस्टर्ीकृत िकया गया है ।
(3) उपधारा (1) के परन्तुक के पर्योजनᲂ के िलए यह समझा जाएगा िक अिवभक्त भारत के बाहर पैदा हुआ
1[कोई भी व्यिक्त] जो संिवधान के पर्ारम्भ के समय भारत का नागिरक था या समझा जाता था, अवजनन ᳇ारा भारत का नागिरक है ।
5. रिजस्टर्ीकरण ᳇ारा नागिरकता––2[(1) इस धारा के उपबंधᲂ तथा ऐसी शतᲄ और िनबर्न्धनᲂ के जैसे िविहत िकए जाएं,
अधीन रहते हुए कᱶदर्ीय सरकार, इस िनिमᱫ िकए गए आवेदन पर िकसी ऐसे व्यिक् त को भारत के नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकृत कर
सकेगी जो कोई अवैध पर्वासी नहᱭ है, जो संिवधान या इस अिधिनयम के िकसी अन् य उपबंध के आधार पर पहले ही ऐसा नागिरक नहᱭ
है, यिद वह िनम्निलिखत पर्वगᲄ मᱶ से िकसी पर्वगर् का है, अथार्त् :––
(क) भारतीय उद् भव का वह व्यिक्त जो रिजस्टर्ीकरण के िलए आवेदन करने के सात वषर् पूवर् से भारत मᱶ मामूली
तौर से िनवासी है;
(ख) भारतीय उद् भव का वह व् यिक्त जो अिवभक्त भारत के बाहर िकसी देश या स्थान मᱶ मामूली तौर से
िनवासी है;
(ग) कोई व्यिक्त जो भारत के िकसी नागिरक से िववािहत है और रिजस्टर्ीकरण के िलए आवेदन करने के सात वषर्
पूवर् से भारत मᱶ मामूली तौर से िनवासी है;
(घ) ऐसे व्यिक्तयᲂ के, जो भारत के नागिरक हᱹ, अपर्ाप्तवय बालक;
(ङ) वय: पर्ाप् त और पूणर् सामथ् यर् का ऐसा व् यिक् त िजसके िपता-माता इस उपधारा के खंड (क) या धारा 6 की
उपधारा (1) के अधीन भारत के नागिरकᲂ के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकृत हᱹ;
(च) वय: पर्ाप् त और पूणर् सामथ् यर् का ऐसा व् यिक्त जो या िजसके िपता/माता मᱶ से कोई पहले स्वतंतर् भारत का
नागिरक था और रिजस्टर्ीकरण के िलए कोई आवेदन करने के ठीक 3[बारह मास पूवर् से भारत मᱶ मामूली तौर से िनवासी है];
(छ) वय: पर्ाप् त और पूणर् सामथ् यर् का ऐसा व् यिक्त जो 3[भारत का काडर् धारक िवदेशी नागिरक] के रूप मᱶ पांच वषर्
से रिजस्टर्ीकृत िकया गया है और जो रिजस्टर्ीकरण के िलए कोई आवेदन करने के 3[बारह मास पूवर् से भारत मᱶ मामूली तौर से
िनवासी है] ।
स् पष् टीकरण 1––खंड (क) और खंड (ग) के पर्योजनᲂ के िलए, िकसी आवेदक को भारत मᱶ मामूली तौर से िनवासी समझा
जाएगा, यिद,––
(i) वह रिजस्टर्ीकरण के िलए आवेदन करने के ठीक बारह मास पूवर् की संपूणर् अविध मᱶ भारत मᱶ रहा है; और
(ii) उसने बारह मास की उक्त अविध के ठीक पूवर्वतᱮ आठ वषᲄ के दौरान कम से कम छह वषर् की अविध के िलए
भारत मᱶ िनवास िकया है ।
स् पष् टीकरण 2––इस उपधारा के पर्योजनᲂ के िलए कोई व्यिक्त भारतीय उद्भव का समझा जाएगा यिद वह या उसके
िपता-माता मᱶ से कोई अिवभक्त भारत मᱶ या ऐसे अन्य राज्यक्षेतर् मᱶ, जो 15 अगस्त, 1947 के पश्चात् भारत का भाग हो गया है, पैदा
हुआ था ।]
4[(1क) केन्दर्ीय सरकार, यिद उसका यह समाधान हो जाता है िक िवशेष पिरिस्थितयां िव᳒मान हᱹ, पिरिस्थितयᲂ को
अिभिलिखत करने के पश्चात् उपधारा (1) के खंड (च) और खंड (छ) तथा स्पष्टीकरण 1 के खंड (i) मᱶ िविनिदष् ट बारह मास की अविध
को अिधकतम तीस िदन के िलए, जो िविभन्न खंडᲂ मᱶ हो सकेगी, िशिथल कर सकेगी ।]
(2) कोई भी वय: पर्ाप् त व्यिक्त उपधारा (1) के अधीन भारत के नागिरकᲂ के रूप मᱶ तब तक रिजस् टर्ीकृत नहᱭ िकया जाएगा
जब तक उसने ि᳇तीय अनुसूची मᱶ िविनिदष्ट पर्रूप मᱶ राजिनष्ठा की शपथ न ले ली हो ।

1 1992 के अिधिनयम सं० 39 की धारा 2 ᳇ारा “कोई भी पुरुष व् यिक्त” के स्थान पर पर्ितस् थािपत ।
2 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 5 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
3 2015 के अिधिनयम सं० 1 की धारा 3 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
4 2015 के अिधिनयम सं० 1 की धारा 3 ᳇ारा अंत:स् थािपत ।

[PAGE 22]
(3) कोई भी व्यिक्त िजसने अपनी भारतीय नागिरकता त् याग दी है या जो उससे वंिचत कर िदया गया है या िजसकी
भारतीय नागिरकता इस अिधिनयम के अधीन पयर्विसत हो गई है, उपधारा (1) के अधीन भारतीय नागिरक के रूप मᱶ केन्दर्ीय सरकार
के आदेश के िबना रिजस्टर्ीकृत नहᱭ िकया जाएगा ।
(4) यिद केन्दर्ीय सरकार का समाधान हो जाता है िक ऐसे रिजस्टर्ीकरण को न्यायोिचत ठहराने वाली िवशेष पिरिस् थितयां हᱹ,
तो वह िकसी अपर्ाप्तवय को भारतीय नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकृत करा सकेगी ।
(5) इस धारा के अधीन रिजस्टर्ीकृत व् यिक्त रिजस्टर्ीकरण ᳇ारा भारत का नागिरक उस तारीख से ही हो जाएगा िजसको वह
इस पर्कार रिजस्टर्ीकृत िकया जाता है; और संिवधान के अनुच्छेद 6 के खण् ड (ख)(ii) के या अनुच्छेद 8 के उपबन् धᲂ के अधीन रिजस्टर्ीकृत
व्यिक्त संिवधान के पर्ारम् भ से या उस तारीख से ही िजसको वह इस पर्कार रिजस्टर्ीकृत िकया गया था इनमᱶ से जो भी पश्चात्वतᱮ हो,
रिजस्टर्ीकरण ᳇ारा भारत का नागिरक समझा जाएगा ।
1[(6) यिद कᱶदर्ीय सरकार का समाधान हो जाता है िक ऐसी पिरिस्थितयां िव᳒मान हᱹ जो िकसी व्यिक्त या व्यिक्तयᲂ के वगर्
को उपधारा (1) के खंड (ग) के अधीन िनवास संबंधी अपेक्षा से छूट देना आवश्यक बनाती है तो वह, लेखब᳍ िकए जाने वाले कारणᲂ से,
ऐसी छूट दे सकेगी ।]
6. देशीयकरण ᳇ारा नागिरकता––(1) जहां िक वय: पर्ाप्त के और पूणर् सामथ् यर् के िकसी ऐसे व्यिक्त ᳇ारा, 2[जो अवैध पर्वासी
नहᱭ है], देशीयकरण पर्माणपतर् के अनुदान के िलए िविहत रीित मᱶ आवेदन िकया जाता है, वहां यिद केन्दर्ीय सरकार का समाधान हो
जाता है िक आवेदक तृतीय अनुसूची के उपबंधᲂ के अधीन देशीयकरण के िलए अिहत है, तो वह उसे देशीयकरण पर्माणपतर् अनुदᱫ कर
सकेगी :
परन्तु यिद केन्दर्ीय सरकार की राय मᱶ आवेदक ऐसा व्यिक्त है िजसने िवज्ञान, दशर्न, कला, सािहत् य, िवश्व शािन् त या
साधारणत: मानव पर्गित के िनिमᱫ िविशष् ट सेवा की है, तो वह तृतीय अनुसूची मᱶ िविनिदष् ट सब शतᲄ का या उनमᱶ से िकसी का भी
अिधत् यजन कर सकेगी ।
(2) िजस व्यिक्त को उपधारा (1) के अधीन देशीयकरण पर्माणपतर् अनुदᱫ िकया गया है वह ि᳇तीय अनुसूची मᱶ िविनिदष् ट
पर्रूप मᱶ राजिनष् ठा की शपथ लेने पर उस तारीख से ही िजसको वह पर्माणपतर् अनुदᱫ िकया गया है, देशीकरण ᳇ारा भारत का
नागिरक होगा ।
3[6क. असम सहमित के अन्तगर्त आने वाले व्यिक्तयᲂ की नागिरकता के बारे मᱶ िवशेष उपबन्ध––(1) इस धारा के पर्योजनᲂ
के िलए,––
(क) “असम” से नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 1985 के पर्ारंभ के ठीक पूवर् असम राज् य मᱶ सिम्मिलत राज् यक्षेतर्
अिभपर्ेत है;
(ख) “िवदेशी होने का पता चलना” से िवदेिशयᲂ िवषयक अिधिनयम, 1946 (1946 का 31) और िवदेिशयᲂ िवषयक
(अिधकरण) आदेश, 1964 के उपबंधᲂ के अनुसार उक् त आदेश् ा के अधीन गिठत अिधकरण ᳇ारा िवदेशी होने का पता चलना
अिभपर्ेत है;
(ग) “िविनिदष् ट राज् य᭯ ोतर्” से नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 1985 के आरम्भ के ठीक पूवर् बंग्लादेश मᱶ
सिम्मिलत राज् यक्षेतर् अिभपर्ेत है;
(घ) कोई व्यिक्त भारतीय उद्भव का समझा जाएगा यिद वह अथवा उसके माता या िपता मᱶ से कोई अथवा उसके
िपतामह या मातामह या िपतामही या मातामही मᱶ से कोई अिवभक्त भारत मᱶ पैदा हुआ था;
(ङ) िकसी व्यिक् त के बारे मᱶ यह समझा जाएगा िक उसके िवदेशी होने का उस तारीख को पता चला है िजसको
िवदेिशयᲂ िवषयक (अिधकरण) आदेश, 1964 के अधीन गिठत अिधकरण इस आशय की अपनी राय िक वह िवदेशी है,
संबंिधत अिधकारी या पर्ािधकारी को पर्स् तुत करता है ।
(2) उपधारा (6) और उपधारा (7) के उपबंधᲂ के अधीन रहते हुए भारतीय उद्भव के उन सभी व्यिक्तयᲂ को, जो िविनिदष् ट
राज्यक्षेतर् से असम मᱶ 1 जनवरी, 1966 के पूवर् आए हᱹ (िजनके अन्तगर्त वे व्यिक्त हᱹ; िजनके नाम 1967 मᱶ हुए लोक सभा के साधारण
िनवार्चन के पर्योजनᲂ के िलए उपयोग की गई िनवार्चक नामावली मᱶ सिम् मिलत िकए गए थे) और जो असम मᱶ अपने पर्वेश की तारीख
से असम मᱶ मामूली तौर से िनवासी रहे हᱹ, 1 जनवरी, 1966 से ही भारत का नागिरक समझा जाएगा ।
(3) उपधारा (6) और उपधारा (7) के उपबंधᲂ के अधीन रहते हुए, भारतीय उद्भव का पर्त्येक ऐसा व्यिक्त––
(क) जो िविनिदष् ट राज्यक्षेतर् से 1 जनवरी, 1966 को या उसके पश्चात् िकन् तु 25 माचर्, 1971 के पूवर् असम मᱶ
आया है; और

1 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 5 ᳇ारा अन् त:स् थािपत ।
2 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 6 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
3 1985 के अिधिनयम सं० 65 की धारा 2 ᳇ारा (7-12-1985 से) अन् त:स् थािपत ।

[PAGE 23]
(ख) जो असम मᱶ अपने पर्वेश की तारीख से असम मᱶ मामूली तौर से िनवासी रहा है; और
(ग) िजसके िवदेशी होने का पता चला है,
धारा 18 के अधीन इस िनिमᱫ केन्दर्ीय सरकार ᳇ारा बनाए गए िनयमᲂ के अनुसार ऐसे पर्ािधकारी के पास (िजसे इस उपधारा मᱶ इसके
पश्चात् रिजस्टर्ीकरण पर्ािधकारी कहा गया है) जो ऐसे िनयमᲂ मᱶ िविनिदष् ट िकया जाए, अपने को रिजस्टर्ीकृत कराएगा और यिद
उसका नाम ऐसे पता चलने की तारीख को िकसी सभा िनवार्चन-क्षेतर् या संसदीय िनवार्चन-क्षेतर् के िलए पर्वृᱫ िकसी िनवार्चक
नामावली मᱶ सिम्मिलत है तो उसके नाम का वहां से लोप कर िदया जाएगा ।
स् पष् टीकरण––इस उपधारा के अधीन रिजस्टर्ीकरण चाहने वाले पर्त्येक व्यिक्त के मामले मᱶ, िवदेिशयᲂ िवषयक (अिधकरण)
आदेश, 1964 के अधीन गिठत अिधकरण की उस राय को, िजसमᱶ ऐसे व्यिक्त को िवदेशी अिभिनधार्िरत िकया गया है, इस उपधारा के
खण् ड (ग) के अधीन अपेक्षाᲐ का पयार्प् त सबूत माना जाएगा और यिद इस बारे मᱶ कोई पर्श्न उठता है िक क्या ऐसा व्यिक्त इस
उपधारा के अधीन कोई अन्य अपेक्षा पूरी करता है तो रिजस्टर्ीकरण पर्ािधकारी,––
(i) यिद ऐसी राय मᱶ ऐसी अन् य अपेक्षा के संबंध मᱶ कोई िनष् कषर् है तो उस पर्श् न का ऐसे िनष् कषर् के अनुरूप
िविनश्चय करेगा;
(ii) यिद ऐसी राय मᱶ ऐसी अन् य अपेक्षा के संबंध मᱶ कोई िनष् कषर् नहᱭ है तो उस पर्श् न को उक्त आदेश के अधीन
गिठत िकसी ऐसे अिधकरण को, जो अिधकािरता रखता है, ऐसे िनयमᲂ के अनुसार जो केन्दर्ीय सरकार धारा 18 के अधीन इस
िनिमᱫ बनाए, िनदᱷिशत करेगा और उस पर्श्न का ऐसे िनदᱷश पर पर्ाप्त राय के अनुरूप िविनश्चय करेगा ।
(4) उपधारा (3) के अधीन रिजस्टर्ीकृत व्यिक्त के, उस तारीख से ही िजसको उसके िवदेशी होने का पता चला है, और उस
तारीख से दस वषर् की अविध के अवसान तक वही अिधकार और बाध् यताएं हᲂगी जो भारतीय नागिरक की हᱹ (िजनके अन्तगर्त पासपोटर्
अिधिनयम, 1967 (1967 का 15) के अधीन पासपोटर् अिभपर्ाप् त करने के अिधकार और उससे सम् बिन् धत बाध् यताएं हᱹ) िकन् तु वह उक्त
दस वषर् की अविध के अवासन के पूवर् िकसी समय िकसी सभा िनवार्चन-क्षेतर् या संसदीय िनवार्चन-क्षेतर् के िलए िकसी िनवार्चक
नामावली मᱶ अपना नाम सिम्मिलत कराने का हकदार नहᱭ होगा ।
(5) उपधारा (3) के अधीन रिजस्टर्ीकृत कोई व्यिक् त उस तारीख से िजसको उसके िवदेशी होने का पता चला है दस वषर् की
अविध के अवसान की तारीख से ही सभी पर्योजनᲂ के िलए भारत का नागिरक समझा जाएगा ।
(6) धारा 8 के उपबन्धᲂ पर पर्ितकूल पर्भाव डाले िबना,––
(क) यिद उपधारा (2) मᱶ िनिदष् ट कोई व्यिक्त नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 1985 के पर्ारंभ की तारीख से
साठ िदन के भीतर िविहत रीित से और िविहत पर्रूप मᱶ तथा िविहत पर्ािधकारी को यह घोषणा पर्स् तुत करता है िक वह
भारत का नागिरक नहᱭ होना चाहता है तो ऐसे व्यिक्त के बारे मᱶ यह समझा जाएगा िक वह उस उपधारा के अधीन भारत
का नागिरक नहᱭ हुआ है;
(ख) यिद उपधारा (3) मᱶ िनिदष् ट कोई व् यिक्त, नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 1985 के पर्ारंभ की तारीख से या
उस तारीख से िजसको उसके िवदेशी होने का पता चला है, इनमᱶ से जो पश्चात्वतᱮ हो, साठ िदन के भीतर िविहत रीित से
और िविहत पर्रूप मᱶ तथा िविहत पर्ािधकारी को यह घोषणा पर्स् तुत करता है िक वह उस उपधारा तथा उपधारा (4) और
उपधारा (5) के उपबंधᲂ ᳇ारा शािसत नहᱭ होना चाहता है तो ऐसे व्यिक्त के िलए यह आवश्यक नहᱭ होगा िक वह उपधारा
(3) के अधीन अपने को रिजस्टर्ीकृत कराए ।
स् पष् टीकरण––जहां कोई व्यिक्त, िजससे इस उपधारा के अधीन कोई घोषणा फाइल करने की अपेक्षा की जाती है संिवदा
करने के िलए समथर् नहᱭ है वहां ऐसी घोषणा उसकी ओर से िकसी ऐसे व्यिक्त ᳇ारा फाइल की जा सकेगी जो तत्समय पर्वृᱫ िकसी
िविध के अधीन उसकी ओर से कायर् करने के िलए सक्षम है ।
(7) उपधारा (2) से उपधारा (6) की कोई बात िकसी ऐसे व्यिक्त के सम्बन् ध मᱶ लागू नहᱭ होगी,––
(क) जो नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 1985 के पर्ारंभ के ठीक पूवर् भारत का नागिरक है;
(ख) जो नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 1985 के पर्ारंभ के पूवर् िवदेिशयᲂ िवषयक अिधिनयम, 1946
(1946 का 31) के अधीन भारत से िनष् कािसत िकया गया था ।
(8) इस धारा मᱶ अिभव्यक्त रूप से जैसा अन्यथा उपबिन्धत है उसके िसवाय, इस धारा के उपबंध तत् समय पर्वृᱫ िकसी अन्य
िविध मᱶ िकसी बात के होते हुए भी पर्भावी हᲂगे ।]
7. राज् यक्षेतर् मᱶ िमल जाने से नागिरकता––यिद कोई राज्यक्षेतर् भारत का भाग बन जाता है, तो केन्दर्ीय सरकार शासकीय
राजपतर् मᱶ अिधसूिचत आदेश ᳇ारा, उन व्यिक्तयᲂ को िविनिदष् ट कर सकेगी जो उस राज् यक्षेतर् से अपने संसंग के कारण भारत के
नागिरक हᲂगे; और वे व्यिक्त भारत के नागिरक उस तारीख से ही, जो उस आदेश मᱶ िविनिदष्ट की जाएगी, हो जाएंगे ।

[PAGE 24]
1[िवदेशी नागिरकता]
2[7क. भारत के काडर् धारक िवदेशी नागिरक का रिजस्टर्ीकरण––(1) केन्दर्ीय सरकार, ऐसी शतᲄ, िनबर्ंधनᲂ और रीित के
अधीन रहते हुए, जो िविहत िकए जाएं, इस िनिमᱫ िकए गए िकसी आवेदन पर,––
(क) िकसी वय: पर्ाप् त और पूणर् सामथ् यर् के ऐसे व्यिक्त को,––
(i) जो दूसरे देश का नागिरक है, िकन्तु संिवधान के पर्ारंभ के समय या उसके पश्चात् िकसी समय भारत
का नागिरक था; या
(ii) जो दूसरे देश का नागिरक है, िकन्तु संिवधान के पर्ारंभ के समय भारत का नागिरक होने के िलए पातर्
था; या
(iii) जो दूसरे देश का नागिरक है, िकन्तु ऐसे राज् यक्षेतर् से संब᳍ था, जो 15 अगस्त, 1947 के पश् चात्
भारत का भाग बन गया था; या
(iv) जो िकसी ऐसे नागिरक का पुतर्/पुतर्ी या पौतर्/पौतर्ी, दौिहतर्/दौिहतर्ी या पर्पौतर्/पर्पौतर्ी,
पर्दौिहतर्/पर्दौिहतर्ी है; या
(ख) िकसी ऐसे व् यिक्त को, जो खंड (क) मᱶ विणत िकसी व् यिक्त का अपर्ाप् तवय पुतर्/पुतर्ी है; या
(ग) िकसी ऐसे व् यिक्त को, जो अपर्ाप्तवय पुतर्/पुतर्ी है और िजसके माता-िपता दोनᲂ भारत के नागिरक हᱹ या
माता-िपता मᱶ से एक भारत का नागिरक है; या
(घ) भारत के िकसी नागिरक के िवदेशी मूल के पित या पत्नी को या धारा 7क के अधीन रिजस्टर्ीकृत भारत के काडर्
धारक िवदेशी नागिरक के िवदेशी मूल के पित या पत्नी को और िजसका िववाह इस धारा के अधीन आवेदन पर्स् तुत करने के
ठीक पहले रिजस्टर्ीकृत हो गया है और दो वषर् से अन्यून की िनरंतर अविध तक बना हुआ है,
भारत के काडर् धारक िवदेशी नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकृत कर सकेगी :
परंतु भारत के काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकरण की पातर्ता के िलए ऐसे पित या पत्नी को भारत मᱶ िकसी
सक्षम पर्ािधकारी से पूिवक सुरक्षा अनापिᱫ पर्माणपतर् लेना होगा :
परंतु यह और िक कोई ऐसा व् यिक्त, जो स्वयं या िजसके माता-िपता या िपतामह-िपतामही या पर्िपतामह-पर्िपतामही
पािकस्तान, बंग्लादेश या ऐसे अन्य देश का, िजसको कᱶदर्ीय सरकार, राजपतर् मᱶ अिधसूचना ᳇ारा िविनिदष् ट करे, नागिरक है या रहा
था, इस उपधारा के अधीन भारत के काडर् धारक िवदेशी नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकरण के िलए पातर् नहᱭ होगा ।
(2) केन्दर्ीय सरकार, राजपतर् मᱶ अिधसूचना ᳇ारा, ऐसी तारीख िविनिदष् ट कर सकेगी िजससे भारतीय मूल के िव᳒मान काडर्
धारक व्यिक्तयᲂ को भारत का काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक समझा जाएगा ।
स् पष् टीकरण––उपधारा (2) के पर्योजनᲂ के िलए, भारतीय मूल के काडर्धारक व्यिक् तयᲂ से इस संबंध मᱶ केन्दर्ीय सरकार ᳇ारा
जारी की गई अिधसूचना संख् या 26011/4/98 एफ०आई० तारीख 19 अगस्त, 2002 के अधीन उस रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकृत व् यिक्त
अिभपर्ेत हᱹ ।
(3) उपधारा (1) मᱶ अन्तिवष् ट िकसी बात के होते हुए भी केन्दर्ीय सरकार, यिद उसका यह समाधान हो जाता है िक िवशेष
पिरिस्थितयां िव᳒मान हᱹ, िलिखत मᱶ पिरिस्थितयां अिभिलिखत करने के पश्चात् ऐसे व्यिक्त को भारत के काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक
के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर कर सकेगी ।
7ख. भारत के काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक को अिधकार पर्दान िकया जाना––(1) तत्समय पर्वृᱫ िकसी अन्य िविध मᱶ
अंतिवष् ट िकसी बात के होते हुए भी, भारत का काडर् धारक कोई िवदेशी नागिरक, उपधारा (2) के अधीन िविनिदष्ट अिधकारᲂ से
िभन्न, ऐसे अिधकारᲂ का, जो केन् दर्ीय सरकार, राजपतर् मᱶ अिधसूचना ᳇ारा इस िनिमᱫ िविनिदष् ट करे, हकदार होगा ।
(2) भारत का काडर्धारक कोई िवदेशी नागिरक,––
(क) लोक िनयोजन के िवषय मᱶ अवसर की समता के बारे मᱶ संिवधान के अनुच्छेद 16 के अधीन;
(ख) राष्टर्पित के रूप मᱶ िनवार्चन के िलए संिवधान के अनुच्छेद 58 के अधीन;
(ग) उपराष्टर्पित के रूप मᱶ िनवार्चन के िलए संिवधान के अनुच्छेद 66 के अधीन;
(घ) उच्चतम न्यायालय के िकसी न् यायाधीश के रूप मᱶ िनयुिक्त के िलए संिवधान के अनुच्छेद 124 के अधीन;

1 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 7 ᳇ारा अंत:स् थािपत ।
2 2015 के अिधिनयम सं० 1 की धारा 4 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।

[PAGE 25]
(ङ) उच्च्ा न्यायालय के िकसी न्यायाधीश के रूप मᱶ िनयुिक्त के िलए संिवधान के अनुच्छेद 217 के अधीन;
(च) मतदाता के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकरण के संबंध मᱶ लोक पर्ितिनिधत्व अिधिनयम, 1950 (1950 का 43) की धारा 16
के अधीन;
(छ) यथािस्थित, लोक सभा या राज् य सभा का सदस् य होने के िलए पातर्ता के संबंध मᱶ लोक पर्ितिनिधत् व
अिधिनयम, 1951 (1951 का 43) की धारा 3 और धारा 4 के अधीन;
(ज) िकसी राज् य की, यथािस्थित, िवधान सभा या िवधान पिरषद् का सदस्य होने के िलए पातर्ता के संबंध मᱶ लोक
पर्ितिनिधत् व अिधिनयम, 1951 (1951 का 43) की धारा 5, धारा 5क और धारा 6 के अधीन;
(झ) संघ या िकसी राज्य के िकर्याकलापᲂ के संबंध मᱶ लोक सेवाᲐ और पदᲂ पर िनयुिक्त के िलए, िसवाय ऐसी
सेवाᲐ और पदᲂ पर िनयुिक्त के िलए, जो केन्दर्ीय सरकार इस िनिमᱫ िवशेष आदेश ᳇ारा िविनिदष् ट करे,
भारत के नागिरक को पर्दान िकए गए अिधकरᲂ का हकदार नहᱭ होगा ।
(3) उपधारा (1) के अधीन जारी की गई पर्त्येक अिधसूचना संसद् के पर्त्येक सदन के समक्ष रखी जाएगी ।
7ग. भारत के िवदेशी नागिरक के काडर् का त्यजन––(1) यिद वय: पर्ाप् त और पूणर् सामथ् यर् का भारत का काडर्धारक कोई
िवदेशी नागिरक िविहत रीित मᱶ भारत के काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक के रूप मᱶ उसे रिजस्टर िकए जाने संबंधी काडर् का त्यजन करते
हुए कोई घोषणा करता है तो वह घोषणा केन्दर्ीय सरकार ᳇ारा रिजस् टर्ीकृत की जाएगी और ऐसे रिजस्टर्ीकरण पर ऐसा व्यिक्त भारत
का काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक नहᱭ रह जाएगा ।
(2) जहां कोई व् यिक्त उपधारा (1) के अधीन भारत का काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक नहᱭ रह जाता है वहां उस व्यिक्त का
िवदेशी मूल का पित या पत्नी, िजसने धारा 7क की उपधारा (1) के खंड (घ) के अधीन भारत के िवदेशी नागिरक होने का काडर्
अिभपर्ाप्त िकया है और उस व्यिक्त का भारत के िवदेशी नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकृत पर्त्येक अपर्ाप् तवय बालक तदुपिर भारत का
काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक नहᱭ रह जाएगा ।
7घ. भारत के काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकरण का र᳎करण––(1) केन्दर्ीय सरकार, आदेश ᳇ारा, धारा 7क
की उपधारा (1) के अधीन अनुदᱫ रिजस्टर्ीकरण को र᳎ कर सकेगी, यिद उसका यह समाधान हो जाता है िक,––
(क) भारत के काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकरण कपट, िमथ्या व्यपदेशन ᳇ारा या िकसी ताित्त्वक
तथ् य को िछपाकर अिभपर्ाप्त िकया गया था; या
(ख) भारत के काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक ने िविध ᳇ारा यथास्थािपत भारत के संिवधान के पर्ित अपर्ीितपूणर् दिशत
िकया है; या
(ग) भारत के काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक ने, िकसी ऐसे यु᳍ के दौरान, िजसमᱶ भारत लगा हुआ हो, िकसी शतर्ु के
साथ िविधिवरु᳍तया व् यापार िकया है या संचार िकया है या वह िकसी ऐसे कारबार या वािणिज्यक िकर्याकलाप मᱶ लगा रहा
है या उससे सहयुक्त रहा है, िजसके बारे मᱶ उसे यह ज्ञात था िक वह ऐसी रीित से चलाया जा रहा है िक उससे उस यु᳍ मᱶ
िकसी शतर्ु को सहायता िमले; या
(घ) भारत के काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक को, धारा 7क की उपधारा (1) के अधीन रिजस्टर्ीकरण के पश्चात् पांच
वषर् के भीतर, दो वषर् से अन्यून की अविध के िलए कारावास से दंडािदष् ट हो चुका है; या
(ङ) भारत की पर्भुता और अखंडता, भारत की सुरक्षा, िकसी िवदेश के साथ भारत के िमतर्तापूणर् संबंधᲂ के िहतᲂ मᱶ
या जनसाधरण के िहतᲂ मᱶ ऐसा करना आवश्यक है; या
(च) भारत के ऐसे िकसी काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक का, िजसने धारा 7क की उपधारा (1) के खंड (घ) के अधीन
ऐसा काडर् अिभपर्ाप्त िकया है, िववाह,––
(i) िकसी सक्षम न्यायालय ᳇ारा अन् यथा िवघिटत कर िदया गया है; या
(ii) िवघिटत नहᱭ िकया गया है, िकन् तु ऐसे िववाह के बने रहने के दौरान, उसने िकसी अन् य व्यिक् त के
साथ िववाह का अनुष्ठापन िकया है ।]
नागिरकता का पयर्वसान
8. नागिरकता का त्यजन––(1) यिद वय: पर्ाप् त और पूणर् सामथ्यर् का भारत का कोई नागिरक 1* * * अपनी भारतीय
नागिरकता के त् यजन की घोषणा िविहत रीित मᱶ करता है, तो वह घोषणा िविहत पर्ािधकारी ᳇ारा रिजस् टर्ीकृत की जाएगी, और ऐसे
रिजस्टर्ीकरण पर वह व्यिक्त भारत का नागिरक न रह जाएगा :

1 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 8 ᳇ारा लोप िकया गया ।

[PAGE 26]
परन्तु यिद ऐसी कोई घोषणा िकसी ऐसे यु᳍ के दौरान की जाती है िजसमᱶ भारत लगा हुआ हो, तो उसका रिजस् टर्ीकरण तब
तक िनधार्िरत रखा जाएगा जब तक केन्दर्ीय सरकार अन्यथा िनदेश नहᱭ दे देती ।
(2) जहां िक 1[कोई व्यिक्त] भारत का नागिरक उपधारा (1) के अधीन नहᱭ रह जाता है, वहां उस व्यिक्त का हर अपर्ाप्तवय
बच्चा तदुपिर भारत का नागिरक न रह जाएगा :
परन्तु ऐसा कोई भी बच्चा वय: पर्ाप् त हो जाने के पश्चात् एक वषर् के अन्दर 2[िविहत पर्रूप मᱶ और रीित से ऐसी कोई
घोषणा] कर सकेगा िक वह भारतीय नागिरकता पुनगर्र्हण करना चाहता है और तदुपिर वह पुन: भारत का नागिरक हो जाएगा ।
3* * * * * * *
9. नागिरकता का पयर्वसान––(1) भारत का कोई नागिरक जो िकसी अन् य देश की नागिरकता देशीयकरण ᳇ारा,
रिजस्टर्ीकरण ᳇ारा या अन्यथा स् वेच्छया अिजत कर लेता है या िजसने 26 फरवरी, 1950 और इस अिधिनयम के पर्ारंभ के बीच िकसी
समय स् वेच्छया अिजत कर ली है, वह, यथािस्थित, ऐसे अजर्न या ऐसे पर्ारम्भ् ा पर भारत का नागिरक न रह जाएगा :
परन्तु इस उपधारा की कोई भी बात भारत के ऐसे नागिरक को, जो िकसी ऐसे यु᳍ के दौरान, िजसमᱶ भारत लगा हुआ हो,
िकसी अन्य देश की नागिरकता का अजर्न स्वेच्छया करता है, तब तक लागू नहᱭ होगी जब तक केन्दर्ीय सरकार अन्यथा िनदेश नहᱭ
दे देती ।
(2) यिद इस बारे मᱶ कोई पर्श् न उठता है िक क्या, कब कैसे 4[िकसी भारत के नागिरक ने] िकसी देश की नागिरकता अिजत की
है, तो उसका अवधारण ऐसे पर्ािधकारी ᳇ारा, ऐसी रीित मᱶ और सा᭯ य के ऐसे िनयमᲂ का ध् यान रखते हुए िकया जाएगा जैसे इस
िनिमᱫ िविहत िकए जाए ।
10. नागिरकता से वंिचत िकया जाना––(1) भारत का वह नागिरक, जो देशीयकरण ᳇ारा या संिवधान के अनुच्छेद 5 के
खण् ड (ग) के ही आधार पर या ऐसे रिजस्टर्ीकरण ᳇ारा जो संिवधान के अनुच्छेद 6 के खण् ड (ख) (ii) या इस अिधिनयम की धारा 5 की
उपधारा (1) के खण् ड (क) के अधीन के रिजस्टर्ीकरण से िभन् न है, भारत का नागिरक नहᱭ रह जाएगा यिद उसे इस धारा के अधीन
केन्दर्ीय सरकार के आदेश ᳇ारा उस नागिरकता से वंिचत कर िदया जाता है ।
(2) इस धारा के उपबन् धᲂ के अध् यधीन रहते हुए यह है िक केन्दर्ीय सरकार ऐसे िकसी नागिरक को भारतीय नागिरकता से
आदेश ᳇ारा उस दशा मᱶ वंिचत कर सकेगी िजसमᱶ िक उसका समाधान हो जाता है––
(क) रिजस्टर्ीकरण या देशीयकरण का पर्माणपतर् कपट, िमथ्या व्यपदेशन या िकसी ताित्त्वक तथ्य को िछपाने ᳇ारा
अिभपर्ाप्त िकया गया था; अथवा
(ख) उस नागिरक ने अपने आपको कायर् या वाणी ᳇ारा या िविध ᳇ारा यथास्थािपत भारत के संिवधान के पर्ित
अभक् त या अपर्ीितपूणर् दिशत िकया है, अथवा
(ग) उस नागिरक ने िकसी ऐसे यु᳍ के दौरान, िजसमᱶ भारत लगा हुआ हो, िकसी शतर्ु के साथ िविधिवरु᳍तया
व्यापार िकया है या संचार िकया है या वह िकसी ऐसे कारबार मᱶ लगा रहा या उससे सहयुक्त रहा है िजसके बारे मᱶ उसे यह
ज्ञान था िक वह ऐसी रीित मᱶ चलाया जा रहा है िक उससे उस यु᳍ मᱶ शतर्ु को सहयाता िमले; अथवा
(घ) वह नागिरक रिजस्टर्ीकरण या देशीयकरण के पश्चात् पांच वषर् के अन्दर िकसी देश मᱶ दो वषर् से अन्यून अविध
के िलए कारावास से दण्डािदष्ट हो चुका है; अथवा
(ङ) वह नागिरक सात वषर् की िनरन् तर कालाविध के िलए भारत के बाहर मामूली तौर से िनवासी रहा है और उस
कालाविध के दौरान िकसी भी समय वह न तो भारत के बाहर िकसी देश मᱶ िकसी िशक्षा-संस्था का िव᳒ाथᱮ या भारत मᱶ की
िकसी सरकार की अथवा िकसी ऐसे अन्तरार्ष्टर्ीय संगठन की, िजसका भारत सदस् य है, सेवा मᱶ रहा है और न उसने भारत की
नागिरकता को पर्ितधािरत करने के अपने आशय को िकसी भारतीय कौन् सलेट मᱶ िविहत रीित मᱶ पर्ितवषर् रिजस्टर्ीकृत
िकया है ।
(3) केन्दर्ीय सरकार इस धारा के अधीन िकसी व् यिक्त को तब के िसवाय नागिरकता से वंिचत नहᱭ करेगी जबिक उसका
समाधान हो जाता है िक यह लोक कल् याण का साधक नहᱭ है िक वह व्यिक्त भारत का नागिरक बना रहे ।
(4) इस धारा के अधीन आदेश करने से पूवर् केन्दर्ीय सरकार उस व्यिक्त को, िजसके िवरु᳍ आदेश करने की पर्स् थापना है,
िलिखत रूप से ऐसी सूचना देगी िजसमᱶ उसे उस आधार की, िजस पर उस आदेश के िकए जाने की पर्स्थापना है, और यिद वह आदेश

1 1992 के अिधिनयम सं० 39 की धारा 3 ᳇ारा “कोई पुरुष व्यिक् त” के स्थान पर पर्ितस् थािपत ।
2 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 8 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
3 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 8 ᳇ारा लोप िकया गया ।
4 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 9 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।

[PAGE 27]
उपधारा (2) मᱶ, उसके खण् ड (ङ) को छोड़कर, िविनिदष् ट आधारᲂ मᱶ से िकसी आधार पर करने की पर्स्थापना है तो इस बात की िक
िविहत रीित मᱶ तिन् निमᱫ आवेदन करने पर इस धारा के अधीन जांच सिमित को अपना मामला िनदᱷिशत कराने का उसे अिधकार है,
इिᱫला दी गई होगी ।
(5) यिद िकसी व्यिक्त के िवरु᳍ आदेश उपधारा (2) मᱶ, उसके खण्ड (ङ) को छोड़कर, िविनिदष् ट आधारᲂ मᱶ से िकसी आधार
पर करने की पर्स् थापना है और वह व्यिक्त िविहत रीित मᱶ ऐसे आवेदन करता है, तो केन्दर्ीय सरकार वह मामला ऐसी जांच सिमित को,
जो केन्दर्ीय सरकार ᳇ारा इस िनिमᱫ िनयुक्त अध्यक्ष से (जो ऐसा व् यिक्त होगा िजसने कम से कम दस वषर् तक कोई न्याियक पद धारण
िकया है) और दो अन्य सदस्यᲂ से िमलकर बनी होगी, िनदᱷिशत करेगी और िकसी अन्य दशा मᱶ उस मामले को िनदᱷिशत कर सकेगी ।
(6) जांच सिमित ऐसे िनदᱷशन पर जांच ऐसी रीित मᱶ करेगी जैसी िविहत की जाए और अपनी िरपोटर् केन्दर्ीय सरकार को
िनवेिदत करेगी और केन्दर्ीय सरकार का इस धारा के अधीन आदेश करने मᱶ मागर्दशर्न मामूली तौर से ऐसी िरपोटर् ᳇ारा होगा ।
अनुपूरक
1* * * * * * *
13. संदेह की दशा मᱶ नागिरकता का पर्माणपतर्––केन्दर्ीय सरकार ऐसे मामलᲂ मᱶ, िजनको वह ठीक समझती है यह पर्मािणत
कर सकेगी िक कोई व् यिक्त, िजसकी भारत की नागिरकता के बारे मᱶ कोई संदेह िव᳒मान है, भारत का नागिरक है, और इस धारा के
अधीन िनकाला गया पर्माणपतर् तब के िसवाय जब िक यह सािबत कर िदया जाता है िक वह कपट, िमथ् या व्यपदेशन या िकसी ताित्त्वक
तथ् य को िछपाने ᳇ारा अिभपर्ाप् त िकया गया था, इस बात का िनश्चायक सा᭯ य होगा िक वह व्यिक्त उस पर्माणपतर् की तारीख को ऐसा
नागिरक था िकन् तु वह िकसी ऐसे सा᭯ य पर िक वह उससे पूवर् िकसी तारीख को ऐसा नागिरक था; पर्ितकूल पर्भाव नहᱭ डालेगी ।
14. धारा 5 और धारा 6 के अधीन आवेदन का िनपटारा––(1) िविहत पर्ािधकारी या केन्दर्ीय सरकार स्विववेकानुसार
2[धारा 5, धारा 6 और धारा 7क] के अधीन िकसी आवेदन को मंजूर या नामंजूर कर सकेगी और ऐसी मंजूरी या नामंजूरी के िलए कोई
कारण देने के िलए अपेिक्षत नहᱭ होगी ।
(2) धारा 15 के उपबन्धᲂ के अधीन रहते हुए, िविहत पर्ािधकारी या केन्दर्ीय सरकार का िविनश् चय िकसी यथापूवᲃक्त आवेदन
पर अिन्तम होगा और िकसी न्यायालय मᱶ पर्श्नगत नहᱭ िकया जाएगा ।
3[14क. राष् टर्ीय पहचानपतर्ᲂ का जारी करना––(1) कᱶदर्ीय सरकार, भारत के पर्त्येक नागिरक को अिनवायर् रूप से रिजस्टर
कर सकेगी और उसको राष् टर्ीय पहचान-पतर् जारी कर सकेगी ।
(2) केन्दर्ीय सरकार, भारतीय नागिरकᲂ का राष् टर्ीय रिजस् टर रख सकेगी और उस पर्योजन के िलए एक राष्टर्ीय रिजस्टर्ीकरण
पर्ािधकारण स्थािपत कर सकेगी ।
(3) नागिरकता (संशोधन) अिधिनयम, 2003 के पर्ारंभ की तारीख से ही, जन्म और मृत्यु रिजस्टर्ीकरण अिधिनयम, 1969
(1969 का 18) की धारा 3 की उपधारा (1) के अधीन िनयुक्त भारत का महारिजस् टर्ार, राष्टर्ीय रिजस् टर्ीकरण पर्ािधकारी के रूप मᱶ कायर्
करेगा और वह नागिरक रिजस्टर्ीकरण महारिजस् टर्ार के रूप मᱶ कृत्य करेगा ।
(4) कᱶदर्ीय सरकार ऐसे अन्य अिधकारी और कमर्चारी िनयुक्त कर सकेगी, जो नागिरक रिजस् टर्ीकरण महारिजस्टर्ार की, उसके
कृत्यᲂ और उᱫरदाियत् वᲂ के िनवर्हन मᱶ, सहायता करने के िलए अपेिक्षत हᲂ ।
(5) भारत के नागिरकᲂ के अिनवायर् रिजस्टर्ीकरण मᱶ अपनाई जाने वाली पर्िकर्या ऐसी होगी जो िविहत की जाए ।]
15. पुनरीक्षण––(1) िविहत पर्ािधकारी या िकसी आिफसर या (केन्दर्ीय सरकार से िभन् न) अन् य पर्ािधकारी ᳇ारा इस
अिधिनयम के अधीन िकए गए िकसी आदेश से व् यिथत व्यिक्त, उस आदेश की तारीख से तीस िदन की कालाविध के अन्दर के पुनरीक्षण
के िलए केन्दर्ीय सरकार से आवेदन कर सकेगा :
परन्तु यिद केन्दर्ीय सरकार का समाधान हो जाता है िक आवेदक समय पर आवेदन करने मᱶ पयार्प् त हेतुक से िनवािरत रहा था
तो वह ऐसे आवेदन को तीस िदन की उक् त कालाविध के अवसान के पश्चात् भी गर्हण कर सकेगी ।
(2) उपधारा (1) के अधीन िकसी ऐसे आवेदन की पर्ािप् त पर केन्दर्ीय सरकार व्यिथत व्यिक्त के आवेदन और उस पर हुई
िकसी िरपोटर् पर, जो आदेश करने वाला आिफसर या पर्ािधकारी िनवेिदत करे, िवचार करने के पश्चात् उस आवेदन के सम् बन् ध मᱶ ऐसा
आदेश करेगी जैसा वह ठीक समझती है और केन्दर्ीय सरकार का िविनश् चय अिन्तम होगा ।
4[15क. पुनिवलोकन––(1) केन्दर्ीय सरकार ᳇ारा िकए गए िकसी आदेश से व्यिथत कोई व्यिक्त, ऐसे आदेश की तारीख से
तीस िदन के भीतर, ऐसे आदेश के पुनिवलोकन के िलए आवेदन कर सकेगा :

1 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 10 ᳇ारा लोप िकया गया ।
2 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 11 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
3 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 12 ᳇ारा अंत:स् थािपत ।
4 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 13 ᳇ारा अंत:स् थािपत ।

[PAGE 28]
परंतु कᱶदर्ीय सरकार तीस िदन की उक्त अविध की समािप् त के पश्चात्, यिद उसका यह समाधान हो जाता है िक आवेदक को
समय से आवेदन करने से पयार्प् त कारण से िनवािरत िकया गया था, आवेदन को गर्हण कर सकेगी :
परंतु यह और िक धारा 14क के उपबंधᲂ के अनुसार पािरत िकसी आदेश के पुनरीक्षण के िलए िकसी आवेदन का िनपटारा उस
पर्िकर्या मᱶ उपबंिधत रीित के अनुसार िकया जाएगा, जो धारा 18 की उपधारा (2) के खंड (iक) के अधीन अिधकिथत की जाए ।
(2) उपधारा (1) के अधीन िकसी आवेदन की पर्ािप्त पर कᱶदर्ीय सरकार ऐसा आदेश कर सकेगी जो वह ठीक समझे और ऐसे
पुनिवलोकन पर कᱶदर्ीय सरकार का िविनश् चय अंितम होगा ।]
16. शिक्तयᲂ का पर्त्यायोजन––केन्दर्ीय सरकार आदेश ᳇ारा िनदेश दे सकेगी िक कोई शिक्त, जो उसे इस अिधिनयम की
उसकी धारा 10 और धारा 18 के उपबन्धᲂ से िभन्न उपबन् धᲂ मᱶ से िकसी उपबन् ध ᳇ारा पर्दᱫ की गई है, ऐसी पिरिस् थितयᲂ मᱶ और ऐसी
शतᲄ के, यिद कोई हᲂ, अधीन जैसी आदेश मᱶ िविनिदष् ट की जाएं, ऐसे आिफसर या पर्ािधकारी ᳇ारा पर्योक् तव् य हᲂगी जैसा इस पर्कार
िविनिदष् ट िकया जाए ।
17. अपराध––जो कोई व्यिक्त िकसी बात का इस अिधिनयम के अधीन िकया जाना या न िकया जाना उपाप् त करने के
पर्योजन के िलए जानते हुए कोई ऐसा व् यपदेशन करेगा जो िकसी ताित्त्वक िविशिष् ट मᱶ िमथ् या है, वह कारावास से, िजसकी अविध
1[पांच वषर्] तक की हो सकेगी, या 1[जुमार्ने से, जो पचास हजार रुपए तक का हो सकेगा] या दोनᲂ से, दण्डनीय होगा ।
18. िनयम बनाने की शिक्त––(1) केन्दर्ीय सरकार इस अिधिनयम के पर्योजनᲂ को कायार्िन्वत करने के िलए िनयम शासकीय
राजपतर् मᱶ अिधसूचना ᳇ारा, बना सकेगी ।
(2) िविशष्टतया और पूवर्गामी शिक्त की व्यापकता पर पर्ितकूल पर्भाव डाले िबना ऐसे िनयम िनम् निलिखत के िलए उपबन्ध
कर सकᱶगे––
(क) इस अिधिनयम के अधीन रिजस्टर्ीकृत होने के िलए अपेिक्षत या पर्ािधकृत िकसी बात का रिजस् टर्ीकरण तथा
ऐसे रिजस्टर्ीकरण के बारे मᱶ शतᱸ और िनबर्न्धन;
2[(कक) वह पर्रूप और रीित, िजसमᱶ धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) के अधीन कोई घोषणा की जाएगी ;]
(ख) वे पर्रूप जो इस अिधिनयम के अधीन उपयोग मᱶ लाए जाएंगे और वे रिजस्टर जो इस अिधिनयम के अधीन
रखे जाएंगे;
(ग) इस अिधिनयम के अधीन राजिनष्ठा की शपथ िदलाना और लेना और वह समय िजसके अन् दर और वह रीित
िजसमᱶ ऐसी शपथᱶ ली जाएंगी और अिभिलिखत की जाएंगी;
(घ) िकसी व्यिक् त ᳇ारा इस अिधिनयम के अधीन िदए जाने के िलए, अपेिक्षत या पर्ािधकृत िकसी सूचना का िदया
जाना;
(ङ) इस अिधिनयम के अधीन नागिरकता से वंिचत िकए गए व् यिक्तयᲂ के रिजस्टर्ीकरण का र᳎करण और उनसे
सम् ब᳍ देशीयकरण के पर्माणपतर्ᲂ का र᳎करण और संशोधन और उन पर्योजनᲂ के िलए ऐसे पर्माणपतर्ᲂ का पिरदᱫ िकया
जाना;
3[(ङङ) वह रीित िजससे और वह पर्रूप िजसमᱶ तथा वह पर्ािधकारी िजसको धारा 6क की उपधारा (6) के खंड (क)
और (ख) मᱶ िनिदष्ट घोषणाएं पर्स्तुत की जाएंगी और ऐसी घोषणाᲐ से सम्बिन् धत अन् य िवषय];
4[(ङङक) ऐसी शतᱸ और रीित िजनके अध् यधीन िकसी व् यिक्त को धारा 7क की उपधारा (1) के अधीन भारत के
काडर्धारक िवदेशी नागिरक के रूप मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकृत िकया जा सकेगा;
(ङङख) धारा 7ग की उपधारा (1) के अधीन भारत के िवदेशी नागिरक के काडर् के त्यजन की घोषणाएं करने
की रीित;]
(च) भारत के बाहर पैदा होने वाले या मरने वाले िकसी वगर् या अिभवणर्न के व्यिक्तयᲂ के जन्मᲂ और मृत्युᲐ का
भारतीय कौन्सलेटᲂ मᱶ रिजस्टर्ीकरण;
(छ) इस अिधिनयम के अधीन के आवेदनᲂ, रिजस् टर्ीकरणᲂ, घोषणाᲐ और पर्माणपतर्ᲂ के सम् बन् ध मᱶ, राजिनष् ठा की
शपथ लेने के सम्बन् ध मᱶ और दस्तावेजᲂ की पर्मािणत या अन्य पर्ितयᲂ के पर्दाय के सम् बन् ध मᱶ फीसᲂ का उद्गर्हण और संगर्हण;

1 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 14 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
2 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 15 ᳇ारा अन् त:स् थािपत ।
3 1985 के अिधिनयम सं० 65 की धारा 3 ᳇ारा (7-12-1985 से) अंत:स् थािपत ।
4 2015 के अिधिनयम सं० 1 की धारा 5 ᳇ारा अंत:स् थािपत ।

[PAGE 29]
(ज) िकसी अन्य देश की नागिरकता के अजर्न के पर्श् न को अवधािरत करने के िलए पर्ािध◌ाकरी, वह पर्िकर्या िजसका
अनुसरण ऐसे पर्ािधकारी ᳇ारा िकया जाएगा और ऐसे मामलᲂ से सम्ब᳍ सा᭯ य के िनयम;
(झ) वह पर्िकर्या िजसका अनुसरण धारा 10 के अधीन िनयुक्त की गई जांच सिमितयᲂ ᳇ारा िकया जाएगा और ऐसी
सिमितयᲂ को िसिवल न् यायालयᲂ की शिक् तयᲂ, अिधकारᲂ और िवशेषािधकारᲂ मᱶ से िकसी का पर्दाय;
1[(झक) धारा 14क की उपधारा (5) के अधीन भारत के नागिरक के अिनवायर् रिजस्टर्ीकरण मᱶ अपनाई जाने वाली
पर्िकर्या;]
(ञ) वह रीित िजसमᱶ पुनरीक्षण के िलए आवेदन िकया जा सकेगा और वह पर्िकर्या िजसका अनुसरण ऐसे आवेदनᲂ
को िनपटाने मᱶ केन्दर्ीय सरकार ᳇ारा िकया जाएगा; तथा
(ट) कोई अन्य िवषय जो इस अिधिनयम के अधीन िविहत िकया जाना है या िकया जाए ।
(3) इस धारा के अधीन कोई िनयम बनाने मᱶ केन् दर्ीय सरकार यह उपबन् ध कर सकेगी िक उसका भंग जुमार्ने से, जो एक हजार
रुपए तक का हो सकेगा, दण्डनीय होगा :
1[परंतु यह िक उपधारा (2) के खंड (झक) मᱶ िविनिदष् ट िकसी िवषय के संबंध मᱶ बनाया गया कोई िनयम यह उपबंध कर
सकेगा िक उसका कोई भंग ऐसी अविध के करावास से, जो तीन मास तक की हो सकेगी या जुमार्ने से जो पांच हजार रुपए तक का हो
सकेगा या दोनᲂ से दंडनीय होगा ।]
2[(4) इस धारा के अधीन बनाया गया पर्त्येक िनयम, बनाए जाने के पश्चात् यथाशीघर्, संसद् के पर्त्येक सदन के समक्ष, जब
वह सतर् मᱶ हो, कुल तीस िदन की अविध के िलए रखा जाएगा । यह अविध एक सतर् मᱶ अथवा दो या अिधक आनुकर्िमक सतर्ᲂ मᱶ पूरी हो
सकेगी । यिद उस सतर् के या पूवᲃक्त आनुकर्िमक सतर्ᲂ के ठीक बाद के सतर् के अवसान के पूवर् दोनᲂ सदन उस िनयम मᱶ कोई पिरवतर्न
करने के िलए सहमत हो जाएं तो तत्पश्चात् वह ऐसे पिरवितत रूप मᱶ ही पर्भावी होगा । यिद उक् त अवसान के पूवर् दोनᲂ सदन सहमत
हो जाएं िक वह िनयम नहᱭ बनाया जाना चािहए तो तत् पश्चात् वह िनष् पर्भाव हो जाएगा । िकन् तु िनयम के ऐसे पिरवितत या
िनष् पर्भाव होने से उसके अधीन पहले की गई िकसी बात की िविधमान् यता पर पर्ितकूल पर्भाव नहᱭ पड़ेगा ।]
19. [िनरिसत ।]––िनरसन और संशोधन अिधिनयम, 1960 (1960 का अिधिनयम सं० 58) की धारा 2 और पर्थम अनुसूची
᳇ारा िनरिसत ।
3* * * * * * *
4[ि᳇तीय अनुसूची
[धारा 5(2) और धारा 6(2) देिखए]
राजिनष् ठा की शपथ
मᱹ, क ख ………………. सत्यिनष् ठा से पर्ितज्ञान करता हूं (या शपथ लेता हूं) िक मᱹ िविध ᳇ारा स्थािपत भारत के संिवधान
के पर्ित सच्ची शर्᳍ा और िनष् ठा रखूंगा और यह िक मᱶ भारत की िविधयᲂ का शर्᳍ापूवर्क अनुपालन करूंगा और भारत के नागिरक के रूप
मᱶ अपने कतर्व्यᲂ को पूरा करूंगा ।]
तृतीय अनुसूची
[धारा 6(1) देिखए]
देशीयकरण के िलए अहर्ताएं
ऐसे व्यिक्त के देशीकरण के िलए, 5* * * अहर्ताएं ये हᱹ िक––
(क) वह िकसी ऐसे देश की पर्जा या नागिरक नहᱭ है जहां भारत के नागिरक देशीयकरण ᳇ारा उस देश की पर्जा या
नागिरक बनने से उस देश की िविध या पर्था ᳇ारा िनवािरत है;
(ख) यिद वह िकसी देश का नागिरक है, 6[तो वह भारतीय नागिरकता के िलए अपना आवेदन स्वीकार होने की
दशा मᱶ उस देश की नागिरकता त् यागने का वचन देता है] ;

1 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 15 ᳇ारा अन् त:स् थािपत ।
2 1986 के अिधिनयम सं० 4 की धारा 2 और अनुसूची ᳇ारा (15-5-1986 से) पर्ितस्थािपत ।
3 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 16 ᳇ारा लोप िकया गया ।
4 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 17 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
5 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 18 ᳇ारा लोप िकया गया ।
6 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 18 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।

[PAGE 30]
(ग) आवेदन की तारीख से अव्यविहत पूवर् बारह मास की कालाविध भर वह या तो भारत मᱶ िनवासी रहा है या
भारत मᱶ की िकसी सरकार की सेवा मᱶ रहा है अथवा भागत: िनवासी रहा है और भागत: सेवा मᱶ रहा है :
1[परंतु यिद केन्दर्ीय सरकार का यह समाधान हो जाता है िक िवशेष पिरिस्थितयां िव᳒मान हᱹ, तो वह ऐसी
पिरिस्थितयᲂ को अिभिलिखत करने के पश्चात् बारह मास की अविध को अिधकतम तीस िदन तक के िलए िशिथल कर
सकेगी, जो िविभन्न खंडᲂ मᱶ हो सकᱶगी ;]
(घ) बारह मास की उक्त कालाविध पूवर् के 2[चौदह वषᲄ] के दौरान वह ऐसी कालाविधयᲂ के िलए जो कुल िमला
कर 2[ग्यारह वषर्] से कम नहᱭ है या तो भारत मᱶ िनवासी रहा या भारत मᱶ की िकसी सरकार की सेवा मᱶ रहा है अथवा
भागत: िनवासी रहा है और भागत: सेवा मᱶ रहा है;
(ङ) वह अच्छे शील का है;
(च) वह संिवधान की अष्टम् अनुसूची मᱶ िविनिदष्ट िकसी भाषा का यथायोग् य ज्ञान रखता है, तथा
(छ) देशीयकरण का पर्माणपतर् उसे अनुदᱫ िकए जाने की दशा मᱶ वह भारत मᱶ िनवास करने या भारत मᱶ की िकसी
सरकार के अधीन अथवा िकसी ऐसे अन्तरराष् टर्ीय संगठन के अधीन िजसका भारत सदस् य है या भारत मᱶ स्थािपत िकसी
सोसाइटी, कम् पनी या व्यिक्त िनकाय के अधीन सेवा मᱶ पर्वेश करने या सेवा मᱶ बने रहने का आशय रखता है :
परन्तु यिद केन्दर्ीय सरकार िकसी िविशष् ट मामले की िवशेष पिरिस् थितयᲂ मᱶ ठीक समझती है, तो वह––
(i) आवेदन की तारीख से छह मास से अनिधक पूवर् समाप्त होने वाली बारह मास की िनरन् तर कालाविध
को उपरोक्त खंड (ग) के पर्योजनᲂ के िलए ऐसे संगिणत िकए जाने की अनुज्ञा दे सकेगी मानो वह उस तारीख से
अव् यविहत पूवर् की हो;
(ii) आवेदन की तारीख से 2[पन्दर्ह वषर्] पहले से अिधक पूवर् के िनवास या सेवा की कालाविधयᲂ को
उपरोक् त खण् ड (घ) मᱶ विणत कुल कालाविध की गणना मᱶ संगिणत करने की अनुज्ञा दे सकेगी ।
3* * * * * * *

______

1 2015 के अिधिनयम सं० 1 की धारा 6 ᳇ारा अंत:स् थािपत ।
2 2004 के अिधिनयम सं० 6 की धारा 18 ᳇ारा पर्ितस्थािपत ।
3 2005 के अिधिनयम सं० 32 की धारा 5 ᳇ारा (28-6-2005 से) लोप िकया गया ।