[PAGE 1]
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
% Reserved on: 20th April, 2026
Pronounced on: 04th August, 2026

# CNR No : DLHC010030442025

+ RFA 73/2025 & CM APPL. 22552/2022

1. KAILASH CHAND
S/o LATE NATHU RAM @ NATHU SINGH
R/o H. N0.369, DOONGAR MOHALLA,
SHAHDARA, DELHI.

2. JAGDISH PRASAD @ JAGDISH CHAND
S/o LATE NATHU RAM @ NATHU SINGH
R/o 27/94/8-A, JWALANAGAR,
SHAHDARA, DELHI. .....Appellants
Through: Ms. Nishu Budhiraja, Advocate.

versus

1. PREM CHAND
S/0 SHRITALEWAR SINGH
R/0 27/94/8-A, JWALA NAGAR,
NEAR TIKONA PARK
SHAHDARA DELHI

2. PYARELAL
S/0 LATE NATHU RAM @ NATHU SINGH
R/0 27/94/8-A JWALANAGAR,
SHAHDARA, DELHI

3. MAHENDER KUMAR
S/0 LATE NATHU RAM @ NATHU SINGH
R/0 27/94/8-A JWALANAGAR,
SHAHDARA DELHI

4. SUBHASH
S/0 LATE NATHU RAM @ NATHU SINGH
R/0 27/94/8-A JWALA NAGAR,

RFA 73/2025 Page 1 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 2]
SHAHDARA DELHI

5. DARSHANA
D/0 LATENATHU RAM @ NATHU SINGH
W/0 HARIKISHAN
R/0 H. NO. 101, SECTOR-8, RAJ NAGAR,
GHAZIABAD, UTTAR PRADESH

6. SHEELA
W/0 RAM SINGH
D/0 LATE NATHU RAM @ NATHU SINGH
R/0H.N0.26,GALIN0. 1,
WARD NO 10, DISTRICT G.B. NAGAR,
UTTAR PRADESH. ....Respondents
Through: Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Ms. Rinku
Narula, Ms. poonam Nagpal, Mr.
Anugrah Ekka, Mr. Kanishk Taneja,
Advocates for R-1.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA

J U D G M E N T

NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA, J.

1. The present Appeal under Section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure,

1908 (hereinafter referred to as „CPC‟) has been filed on behalf of the

Appellants against the Judgment dated 15.11.2010, whereby the Petition

preferred by Respondent No.1/Petitioner Sh. Prem Chand under Section

276 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 was allowed and he was held

entitled to probate of the Will dated 13.12.2005, registered on 28.12.2005.

Letters of Administration for the management and supervision of the

immovable properties mentioned in Schedule A to the Petition, was

consequently granted in his favour.

RFA 73/2025 Page 2 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 3]
2. The Petitioner/Respondent No.1 had filed a Petition bearing

No.87/10under Section 276 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 seeking

probate of the Will dated 13.12.2005, registered on 28.12.2005, executed by

Late Shri Nathu Singh.

3. The brief facts as stated in the Petition, are that the Petitioner/

Respondent No.1 is the son of the deceased, Late Shri Nathu Singh

(hereinafter referred to as "the Testator"), a Hindu, who had expired on

20.01.2008, at Delhi.

4. Late Shri Nathu Singh was survived by six sons namely, Prem Chand

(Petitioner), Mahender Kumar, Jagdish Prasad, Kailash Chand, PyareLal,

Subhash Chand, and two daughters, namely Darshana and Sheela.

5. Late Shri Nathu Singh during his lifetime, executed his first and last

registered Will dated 13.12.2005, registered on 28.12.2005, bequeathing his

land area measuring 2 Bigha, out of Khasra No. 331 (min.) Khewat No.134,

Northern Side, situated in the village of Karkardooma, Illaqa Shahdara,

Delhi and other movable and immovable properties in the favour of his son,

Prem Chand,Petitioner/ Respondent No.1, to the exclusion of all other legal

heirs. The details of the assets bequeathed under the Will, were set out in

Schedule-A, annexed along with the Petition. All other children were

specifically excluded and debarred from claiming any right or benefit, in

respect of his movable or immovable properties.

6. The Petitioner, Prem Chand thus, filed a Petition under S.276 of

Indian Succession Act seeking grant of Probate of registered Will of his

father, Late Shri Nathu Singh.

7. Upon institution of the Probate Petition, citation was issued to the

general public and Notices were served upon all legal heirs of the Testator.

RFA 73/2025 Page 3 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 4]
8. Respondent No. 4, Mahender Kumar, the brother who was one of

the attesting witnesses to the Will, supported the testament.

9. The Petition was contested by the Appellants/Objectors, namely

Kailash Chand, Pyare Lal, Jagdish Prasad and Darshana, who filed a

common Written Statement denying the execution and validity of the

alleged Will. Also, the Petitioner has suppressed the true facts and has not

come with clean hands.

10. The objections taken were that the Probate Petition is not

maintainable, as the Petition has not been signed properly by the Petitioner/

Respondent No.1. Three different kinds of signatures are found on both, the

Petition and the Affidavit, which made it difficult to determine which one

was the original signature of the Petitioner.

11. Further objection was taken that the properties of the deceased

Testator, had already been partitioned amongst his children during his

lifetime; therefore, no question arises of bequeathing the properties in favour

of the Petitioner/ Respondent No.1. A partition pursuant to the family

settlement, was effected by Late Shri Nathu Singh in the presence of

witnesses, whereby it was agreed that the properties would be allotted to the

respective sons, where they were residing and had the possession thereof.

12. The genuineness of the Will was also contested on the ground that the

Testator was approximately 73 years of age at the time of executing the

Will, but his age is not mentioned in the Will. It does not disclose any

reason for excluding Respondent No. 2 to 8 from inheritance, which creates

doubt regarding its genuineness.

13. Further, only one property, namely the land situated at Karkardooma

Village is mentioned on the first page of the Will, and the alleged Will does

RFA 73/2025 Page 4 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 5]
not mention the numbers and addresses of the other properties, though the

same were well known to Late Shri Nathu Singh.

14. It was further alleged that the Petitioner/ Respondent No.1 prepared

the false Will by concealing material facts, in conspiracy with Respondent

No.4, Mahender, to grab all the assets of the deceased Testator.

15. The Petition was based on totally false, concocted and fabricated

facts, and was liable to be dismissed with heavy cost.

16. The Petitioner in the Replication, re-affirmed the assertions as made

in the Petition.

17. The issues on the pleadings, were framed on10.12.2008, as under:

1. Whether will dt. 28.10.05 executed by Sh. Nathu Singh
is valid and genuinely executed in his sound disposing
mind? OPP
2. Whether the petition is not maintainable in view of the
preliminary objections raised by respondents? OPR 2,3,5
and 7
3. Whether the petitioner is entitled for probate as prayed
for? OPP
4. Relief.

18. The Petitioner, Prem Chand, examined himself as PW-1and deposed

that the Testator had personally approached Advocate Shri D.K. Sharma for

preparation of the Will dated 13.12.2005, registered on 28.12.2005, which

was proved as Ex. PW-1/3. He stated that the Testator intended to bequeath

the property situated at Village Karkardooma, along with his other movable

and immovable properties, in favour of PW-1.

19. He further deposed that the Testator, Mahender Kumar, Advocate

D.K. Sharma and PW-1 had gone to the office of the Sub-Registrar, where

RFA 73/2025 Page 5 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 6]
the Testator signed and affixed his thumb impressions on the Will and

explained that he was bequeathing the properties to PW-1 as PW-1 had been

looking after him.

20. PW-2,Sh. Mahender Kumar, (Respondent No.4), one of the attesting

witnesses to the Will, corroborated the evidence of the Petitioner about the

execution of the Will and that the Testator had voluntarily executed and

signed the Will,as an attesting witness in the presence of the Testator.

21. PW-3Shri D.K. Sharma, Advocate, who had drafted the Will and

was also the second attesting witness to the Will, deposed that on the

instructions of the Testator, he had first prepared a draft on stamp papers,

but the same was destroyed in the presence of the Testator. Then, afresh

Will was prepared on plain paper, as per his instructions. The Will was read

over to him, before he signed it in his chamber. PW-3 also signed the Will as

an attesting witness.

22. PW-4, Shri D.S. Rawat, UDC from the office of the Sub-Registrar,

Geeta Colony, produced the original register and deposed that the Will had

been registered on 28.12.2005,videRegistration No.9595, Book No.III,

Volume No.723.

23. The Respondents examined RW-1, Mr. Jagdish Prasad who deposed

that an oral partition had taken place, amongst the sons of the deceased.

24. RW-2, Pyare Lal & RW-3, Ram Phool Singh, in their respective

testimony, denied that the deceased had resided with or was exclusively

looked after by the Petitioner. He however, admitted that the Petitioner had

never been disowned by the deceased, though he volunteered that only

Subhash had been formally disowned.

RFA 73/2025 Page 6 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 7]
25. RW-4, Kailash Chand, Appellant admitted that no specific share or

identifiable portion had ever been allotted by the Testator, to any particular

son. He also admitted that the deceased Testator continued to carry on his

milk business from Shop No.500, Bara Bazar and regularly attended the

shop, till a few months prior to his death.

26. The learned ADJ, upon appreciation of the oral and documentary

evidence, observed that the deceased Testator was in a sound disposing

state of mind at the time of execution of the testament and that the plea of

prior partition, remained wholly unsubstantiated. It was held that the

Petitioner had successfully discharged the burden and had duly proved the

execution and attestation of the Will.

27. Consequently, the Probate Petition was allowed and the Petitioner,

Prem Chand, was held entitled to probate of the Will Ex. PW-1/3. He was

granted Letters of Administration for the management and supervision of

the immovable properties mentioned in Schedule A to the Petition, subject

to payment of the requisite court fee and furnishing of an administration

bond-cum-surety bond.

28. Aggrieved by the aforesaid Judgment, the present Appeal has been

preferred by the Objectors/Appellants, namely, Kailash Chand and Jagdish

Prasad.

29. The grounds of challenge are that the learned ADJ failed to

appreciate the suspicious circumstances surrounding the alleged Will. It was

contended that the Testator had several legal heirs and there existed no

plausible reason for exclusion of the remaining children from succession.

RFA 73/2025 Page 7 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 8]
30. The Petitioner, being the sole beneficiary, had actively participated in

the preparation, execution and registration of the Will, thereby casting a

heightened burden upon him, to dispel every legitimate suspicion.

31. Further, the Will disclosed an unnatural disposition by excluding the

remaining legal heirs, without assigning any reason. The registration of the

Will, by itself, neither proved its due execution nor dispelled the

surrounding suspicious circumstances surrounding the Will.

32. Moreover, the Petitioner's evidence suffered from material

inconsistencies. Particularly, PW-1 had admitted that their deceased father

gave oral direction to distribute the properties equally amongst all the

brothers, which was inconsistent with the recitals of the Will.

33. A reference is also made to the inherent contradictions in the

testimony of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3in regard to the preparation and

execution of the Will.

34. It was further submitted that the Testator, being of advanced age and

suffering from cataract and cancer, lacked the requisite testamentary

capacity to execute the Will. Moreover, the inclusion of the acquired

property comprised of Khasra No. 331 Min., Village Karkardooma, cast a

serious doubt on the authenticity of the testament.

35. It was lastly submitted that the learned ADJ had erroneously rejected

the Respondents' plea of prior oral partition, despite the oral evidence led in

support thereof, which demonstrated that the Testator had already

distributed his properties, during his lifetime.

36. It was therefore, stated that the Petitioner had failed to discharge the

burden and that the learned ADJ committed a manifest error in accepting the

RFA 73/2025 Page 8 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 9]
alleged Will as the last valid testament of the deceased. The impugned

Judgment, therefore, is liable to be set aside.

37. Per contra, Petitioner/Respondent No.1, 3 and 4 in their common

Reply to the present Appeal have supported the impugned Judgment and

submitted that the Will stands proved in accordance with the requirements

of Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 and Section 68 of the

Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

38. The execution and attestation of the Will has been duly proved

through the testimony of the attesting witnesses. Furthermore, the

registration of the Will has been corroborated from official records and there

exists no material circumstance, which would justify rejection of the

testament.

39. It was further stated that no medical evidence whatsoever, has been

produced to establish that the Testator lacked testamentary capacity on the

date of execution of the Will. Mere old age, illness or subsequent medical

treatment, cannot invalidate an otherwise duly executed testamentary

instrument.

40. It has also been submitted that the defense of prior partition, remains

wholly unsubstantiated. The evidence of Petitioner/Respondent No.1, itself

demonstrates that no written partition was ever affected and no witness was

able to specify the date, manner or terms of the alleged partition.

41. It was lastly submitted that the suspicious circumstances alleged by

the Appellants, were adequately explained from the evidence on record. No

ground is established, warranting interference with the findings of the

learned ADJ.

RFA 73/2025 Page 9 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 10]
Submissions heard and record perused.

42. Admittedly, Late Sh. Nathu Singh died on 20.01.2008 and was

survived by six sons, namely, the Petitioner and Respondent Nos. 2 to 6, and

two daughters, namely, Respondent Nos. 7 and 8. Respondent Nos. 2, 3, 5

and 7 have contested the Petition, whereas Respondent No. 6, Sh. Subhash,

and Respondent No. 8, Smt. Sheela, furnished their respective “No

Objection”to the grant of Probate/Letters of Administration in favour of the

Petitioner, Prem Chand, on the basis of the Will dated 13.12.2005.

Respondent No.4, Sh.Mahender Kumar (brother), deposed in favour of the

Petitioner.

43. The following questions arise for consideration in the present Appeal:

(i) Whether the execution and attestation of the Will dated
13.12.2005 stand duly proved in accordance with Section 63
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 read with Section 68 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872?

(ii) Whether the Testator was in a sound disposing state of mind
at the time of execution of the Will dated 13.12.2005?

(iii) Whether the Will is surrounded by suspicious
circumstances?

(iv) Whether the plea of prior oral partition of the properties of
the Testator stands established from the evidence on
record?

(v) Whether the impugned Judgment suffers from any illegality,
perversity or misappreciation of evidence warranting
interference by this Court in appellate jurisdiction?

RFA 73/2025 Page 10 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 11]
I. Whether the execution and attestation of the Will dated 13.12.2005

stand duly proved in accordance with Section 63 of the Indian Succession

Act read with Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act?

44. The first aspect in the Probate Petition is to establish due execution of

the Will. Section 63 of Indian Succession Act, 1925 provides the requisites

of a valid Unprivileged Wills. It reads as under:

“63. Execution of unprivileged wills.-Every testator, not
being a soldier employed in an expedition or engaged in
actual warfare, 1*[or an airman so employed or engaged,]
or a mariner at sea, shall execute his will according to the
following rules:-
(a) The testator shall sign or shall affix his mark to the
will, or it shall be signed by some other person in his
presence and by his direction.
(b) The signature or mark of the testator, or the signature
of the person signing for him, shall be so placed that
it shall appear that it was intended thereby to give
effect to the writing as a will.
(c) The will shall be attested by two or more witnesses,
each of whom has seen the testator sign or affix his
mark to the will or has seen some other person sign the
will, in the presence and by the direction of the
testator, or has received from the testator a personal
acknowledgment of his signature or mark, or of the
signature of such other person; and each of the
witnesses shall sign the will in the presence of the
testator, but it shall not be necessary that more than
one witness be present at the same time, and no
particular form of attestation shall be necessary.”

RFA 73/2025 Page 11 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 12]
45. The essential requirements for the valid execution of a Will are:

firstly, that it must have the signatures of the testator, thereby authenticating

his intention to execute the Will. Secondly, the Will must be attested by two

or more witnesses, each of whom should have seen the testator sign or put

his mark on the Will. Thirdly,the Will must be signed by the witnesses in the

presence of the testator, but it is not necessary that more than one witness

should be present at the same time.

46. To prove the execution of Will, PW-1, Prem Chand, the petitioner

deposed that their father, was the absolute owner of various movable and

immovable properties and while being in a sound disposing state of mind

and fully conscious of the nature and consequences of his acts, voluntarily

executed the Will Ex.PW1/3 out of his own free volition, without any

coercion, undue influence or pressure from any person, in his favour.

47. PW-1 Prem Chand also proved details of the properties constituting

the estate of the deceased, Testator were set out in Schedule-A, Ex.PW1/4.

The properties included House No.27/94/8A, Jwala Nagar, Shahdara, House

No.27/94/8C, Jwala Nagar, property bearing No.369, DoongarMohalla,

property bearing No.325/1, Farash Bazar, land comprised in Khasra No.331

Min. situated in Village Karkardooma, Shop No.500/3 situated at Bara

Bazar, the amounts lying in the bank accounts maintained by the deceased,

the LIC policy standing in his name and every other movable and

immovable asset forming part of his estate.

48. PW-1,Prem Chand further deposed that during the latter part of his

life, the Testator had been residing with him at House No.27/94/8A, Jwala

Nagar, Shahdara and that he alone had been attending to his day-to-day

requirements, medical treatment and overall care. Owing to the affection and

RFA 73/2025 Page 12 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 13]
confidence reposed in him, the Testator consciously decided to bequeath his

entire estate in his favour and executed the aforesaid Will Ex.PW1/3 in his

favour.

49. PW-1 further deposed that the Will was drafted on the instructions

given by the Testator; executed after he understood its contents and

thereafter, and was duly attested in accordance with law. It was further

deposed that after execution of the Will Ex.PW1/3, the Testator personally

appeared before the office of the Sub-Registrar, admitted execution of the

testament and got the same registered on 28.12.2005.

50. In terms of Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, a Will, being

a document required by law to be attested, required the proof by at least one

attesting witness to establish its due execution. In the present case, the

Petitioner examined both the attesting witnesses to the Will.

51. PW-2, Sh. Mahender Kumar (Respondent No. 4), was the elder

brother of the Petitioner/beneficiary, who was actively involved in the

preparation of the Will as well as was one of the attesting witnesses to the

Will. He corroborated the testimony of PW-1 and deposed that the Testator

had personally instructed the Advocate to prepare the Will. He further stated

that the contents of the Will were read over and explained to the Testator,

who, after understanding the contents, voluntarily executed it in his

presence, and that he thereafter, signed the Will as an attesting witness, in

the presence of the Testator.

52. PW-3, Shri D.K. Sharma, Advocate, who drafted the Will and was

also the second attesting witness, deposed that on the instructions of the

Testator, he had initially prepared a draft of the Will on stamp paper, which

was subsequently destroyed in the presence of the Testator. Thereafter, a

RFA 73/2025 Page 13 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 14]
fresh Will was prepared on plain paper, in accordance with the Testator's

instructions. The contents of the Will were read over and explained to the

Testator, who, after admitting the same to be correct, signed the Will in his

chamber. PW-3 also signed the Will as an attesting witness, in the presence

of the Testator.

53. The testimony of PW-3 established that the deceased personally

disclosed the manner in which he desired to bequeath his estate and

executed the document only after acknowledging its correctness.

54. The registration of the Will was proved byPW-4, Sh. D.S. Rawat,

UDC from the office of the Sub-Registrar, Geeta Colony, Delhi, who

deposed that the Will Ex. PW-1/3 was registered in their office, on

28.12.2005.

55. All the witnesses were duly cross-examined by the Appellants, but no

contradiction in the execution of the Will, could be elicited. The evidence on

record, when appreciated in its entirety, consistently indicates that the

deceased himself conceived the intention of executing the Will, personally

furnished instructions for its preparation, understood its contents after the

same had been read over and explained to him, voluntarily executed the

testament and thereafter appeared before the office of the Sub-Registrar for

its registration.

56. The testimony of the attesting witnesses inspires confidence and

remains substantially unshaken in cross-examination. No material has been

brought on record to cast any doubt upon the mental alertness or

understanding of the deceased at the time of execution of the Will. These

circumstances unmistakably indicate that the deceased voluntarily, was fully

RFA 73/2025 Page 14 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 15]
conscious of the nature and effect of the testamentary disposition and the

Will was prepared at his instance.

57. It is therefore, held that the Will Ex.PW-1/3, in terms of S.68

Indian Succession Act and S.63 Evidence Act, is duly established.

II. Whether the Testator was of Sound Mind at the Time of Execution of

Will:

58. The Appellants have next questioned the testamentary capacity of the

deceased Testator by contending that, having regard to his advanced age and

his ailments of cataract and cancer, he was incapable of understanding the

nature and effect of the testamentary disposition.

59. PW-1, Prem Chand, the Petitioner,in his cross-examination, admitted

that the Testator had suffered from cancer and had received treatment at

Dharamshila Cancer Hospital. He, however, denied that the Testator was not

in his senses or lacked testamentary capacity at the time of execution of the

Will. He clarified that the Testator underwent cataract surgery at Jain

Hospital, about one to one-and-a-half years, after execution of the Will.

60. PW-2, Sh. Mahender Kumar, in his cross-examination denied that the

Testator was suffering from cancer at the relevant time or that he suffered

from any physical or mental incapacity, which rendered him incapable of

executing the Will.

61. Likewise, PW-3, Sh. D.K. Sharma, Advocate, during his cross-

examination, also denied that the Testator suffered from any physical or

mental incapacity, and that cataract surgery was conducted only after one to

one-and-a-half years from execution of the Will; he denied that the deceased

was suffering from cancer at the relevant time.

RFA 73/2025 Page 15 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 16]
62. Nothing material could be elicited during the cross-examination of

PW-1, PW-2 or PW-3 so as to discredit their testimony regarding the

physical and mental state of the Testator, at the time of execution of the

Will.

63. The Appellants, on the other hand, have claimed that the Testator was

suffering from cancer and, therefore, did not possess the requisite mental

capacity to execute the Will.

64. In this regard, RW-1, Sh. Jagdish Prasad, and RW-4, Sh. Kailash

Chand, both sons of the Testator, deposed that prior to his demise on

20.01.2008, he was suffering from cancer and was undergoing treatment at

Dharamshila Hospital and Research Centre, Vasundhara Enclave, Delhi.

Their testimony, however, merely establishes that the Testator was suffering

from cancer and was undergoing treatment prior to his demise in January,

2008. It does not establish that he was suffering from cancer on 13.12.2005,

when the Will was executed, or that any such ailment had impaired his

mental faculties or testamentary capacity at the relevant time.

65. Similarly, the ground that the Testator was suffering from cataract

does not advance the case of the Appellants. RW-2, Sh. Pyare Lal, admitted

in his cross-examination that the Testator underwent cataract surgery only in

the year 2006. There is no evidence whatsoever on record to establish that

on 13.12.2005, the cataract had impaired his vision to such an extent that he

was incapable of understanding or executing the Will. Even assuming that

the Testator was suffering from cataract at the relevant time, the same would

not, by itself, establish any mental or cognitive impairment affecting his

capacity to execute the testament.

RFA 73/2025 Page 16 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 17]
66. Moreover, PW-3, Sh. D.K. Sharma, Advocate, had deposed that the

Will was read over to the Testator and he signed it after understanding its

contents. The Will itself also carries an endorsement to the effect that 'this

WILL is made out without any force, fear and undue influence' and that the

Testator had executed the same 'with my free will and without any pressure'

with his 'sound and disposing mind.' The said recitals, read together with the

testimony of PW-3, further reinforce the voluntary nature of the

testamentary act.

67. Significantly, despite specifically alleging that the deceased was

incapable of executing the Will, the Appellants failed to produce any

medical record or examine any treating doctor to establish that the deceased

was suffering from any ailment, as claimed, at the time the Will was

executed in 2005, which impacted his mental faculties, rendering him

incapable of understanding the contents of the Will.

68. Furthermore, the evidence of the Appellants' own witnesses belies the

plea of incapacity. RW-2, Sh. Pyare Lal, admitted in his cross-examination

that the Testator continued to attend the shop until about two months prior to

his demise on 20.01.2008. Likewise, RW-1, Sh. Jagdish Prasad, admitted

that the Testator continued to carry on his milk business from Shop No. 506,

Bada Bazar, until the year 2008. Though RW-1 volunteered that he had

purchased the said shop in the year 1993, by paying the consideration to his

father, his testimony nevertheless establishes that the Testator remained

actively engaged in the business until shortly before his demise. These

circumstances are wholly inconsistent with the allegation that he lacked the

mental capacity to execute the testament on 13.12.2005.

RFA 73/2025 Page 17 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 18]
69. Mere old age, impaired eyesight or subsequent illness cannot, by

themselves, lead to an inference that a testator lacked the mental capacity to

execute a valid Will.

70. In Sridevi v. Jayaraja Shetty, (2005) 2 SCC 784, the Supreme Court

observed that the mere fact that the testator was 80 years of age and died

within 15 days of execution of the Will, was insufficient to doubt his

testamentary capacity, when the attesting witnesses and the scribe had

consistently deposed that he was in a sound state of mind and possessed his

physical and mental faculties.

71. The relevant consideration is whether the testator was capable of

understanding the nature and effect of the disposition at the time when the

testament came to be executed. On the evidence produced on record, there

is no material to conclude that the deceased was deprived of such

understanding, on 13.12.2005.

III. Whether there existed Suspicious Circumstances around the

Execution of Willwarranting its rejection:

72. The Appellants have assailed the genuineness of the Will by relying

upon various alleged suspicious circumstances, namely, the active

participation and undue influence of the Petitioner, exclusion of the other

natural heirs, inclusion of the acquired land situated at Village

Karkardooma, the alleged oral instructions of the Testator stated to be

inconsistent with the recitals of the Will.

73. It is a settled proposition of law that where suspicious circumstances

surround the execution of a Will, the onus lies upon the propounder to dispel

RFA 73/2025 Page 18 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 19]
the same by cogent and satisfactory evidence. The circumstances relied

upon by the Appellants are, therefore, considered hereinafter.

(a) Whether the Will was executed under Undue Influence of the

Petitioner:

74. The principal submission advanced on behalf of the Appellants is that

Prem Chand, the sole beneficiary under the Will, actively participated in its

preparation, execution and registration and that such participation, by

itself, constitutes a suspicious circumstance sufficient to discredit the

testament.

75. In Kavita Kanwar v. Pamela Mehta, AIR 2020 SC 2614, while

considering the plea of active participation of the propounder in the

preparation of the Will, the Supreme Court held that participation of the

beneficiary is only one of the many suspicious circumstances, which may be

explained by the propounder. The question, therefore, is whether the

evidence on record, sufficiently explains the said circumstance.

76. PW-1, as well as PW-2, Sh. Mahender Kumar, consistently deposed

that it was the Testator who was inclined to execute the Will. He himself

had called PW-3, Sh. D.K. Sharma, Advocate and had got the Will prepared.

PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3, in their respective testimony, established that the

deceased personally furnished instructions for the preparation of the

testament, disclosed the manner in which he intended to bequeath his estate

and voluntarily executed the document after its contents had been read over

and explained to him. The material on record, therefore, consistently

indicates that the decision to execute the Will originated from the deceased

Testator himself.

RFA 73/2025 Page 19 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 20]
77. So much so, PW-3, Sh. D.K. Sharma, Advocate, had explained that

earlier, on the Testator's instructions, the Will had been prepared on a stamp

paper but subsequently, on his wish, the Will written on stamp paper was

torn and it was redrafted on a plain paper. There is no serious challenge to

any of these aspects. The said circumstance further demonstrates that the

Testator retained independent control over the preparation of the testament

and was not acting under the direction or influence of any other person.

78. Moreover, it cannot be overlooked that as per PW-2, Sh. Mahender

Kumar, the other brother, Sh. Subhash, was also present outside the Office

of the Sub-Registrar. The very fact that Sh. Mahender Kumar, who has

admittedly not been given any share in the property under the Will, was

actively involved in the preparation and registration of the Will and has

consistently deposed in support of the testament, further negates the

allegation that the Petitioner alone orchestrated the testamentary disposition.

79. Significantly, no material has been brought on record to establish that

the contents of the Will were dictated by the Petitioner or that the

instructions embodied therein did not emanate from the deceased himself.

The mere fact that the Petitioner accompanied the Testator at the time of

execution or registration of the Will cannot, by itself, establish undue

influence. The allegation of undue influence, therefore, remains a mere

assertion unsupported by any cogent evidence.

80. The circumstances attending the registration of the Will further

reinforce the voluntary nature of the testamentary act. PW-2, Sh. Mahender

Kumar, had deposed in his Affidavit of Evidence that the Sub-Registrar had

also verified the facts from the Testator regarding the execution of the Will

and its contents, and had confirmed that the Testator was executing the Will

RFA 73/2025 Page 20 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 21]
with his free consent, without any coercion, pressure or misrepresentation

and in a sound disposing state of mind. There is essentially no cross-

examination on this aspect of PW-2.

81. Another significant aspect, which cannot be overlooked or ignored, is

that the Will was duly registered, a fact which has been deposed by PW-2,

Mr. Mahender Kumar, as well as, PW-3, Mr. D.K. Sharma, Advocate. The

Registered Will Ex PW1/3, which has the signatures of the witness, i.e. PW-

2, Mr. Mahender Kumar and Mr. D.K. Sharma, not at one place but in two

places in consonance with their testimony that they had signed the Will in

the presence of the Registrar, after he had convinced himself about the

genuineness of the Will. It is another factor, which lends support to the

genuineness of the Will.

82. Mere participation of a beneficiary in facilitating the execution or

registration of a Will does not, by itself, constitute a suspicious

circumstance. Unless such participation is accompanied by credible

evidence of coercion, fraud, undue influence or manipulation affecting the

free volition of the testator, it cannot invalidate an otherwise duly proved

testament. No such circumstance has been established in the present case.

Consequently, the objection founded upon the alleged active participation of

the petitioner is liable to be rejected.

(b). Exclusion of the other natural heirs:

83. The Appellants have next contended that the Will is inherently

unnatural, since it excludes almost all the remaining legal heirs and

bequeaths the entire estate in favour of Prem Chand.

84. This contention, by itself, cannot invalidate the testament. It is well

settled that a testator enjoys complete testamentary freedom to dispose of his

RFA 73/2025 Page 21 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 22]
estate in the manner considered appropriate by him. Mere exclusion of one

or more natural heirs, without anything further, does not constitute a

suspicious circumstance. The Court is concerned with the genuineness of the

testament and not with the fairness or wisdom of the disposition made

therein.

85. The legal position has consistently been recognized by the Courts. In

P.P.K. Gopalan Nambiar v. P.P.K. Balakrishnan Nambiar, 1995 Supp (2)

SCC 664 : AIR 1995 SC 1852,the Supreme Court held that it is the duty of

the propounder of the Will to remove all genuine suspicious circumstances,

but there must be real, germane and valid grounds for suspicion, and not the

fantasy of the doubting mind. Once the propounder dispels such suspicious

circumstances, the Court has to give effect to the Will, even if it appears

unnatural in the sense that it excludes, wholly or partly, the testator’s near

relations.

86. ThereafterinRabindra Nath Mukherjee v. Panchanan Banerjee;(1995)

4 SCC 459,the Supreme Court observed that the circumstance of deprivation

of natural heirs should not, by itself, raise any suspicion because the whole

idea behind execution of the Will is to interfere with the normal line of

succession.

87. The said principle was reiterated in Uma Devi Nambiar v. T.C.

Sidhan, (2004) 2 SCC 321, where the Supreme Court held that “A Will is

executed to alter the ordinary mode of succession and by the very nature of

things it is bound to result in either reducing or depriving the share of

natural heirs. If a person intends his property to pass to his natural heirs,

there is no necessity at all of executing a Will. It is true that a propounder of

the Will has to remove all suspicious circumstances. Suspicion means doubt,

RFA 73/2025 Page 22 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 23]
conjecture or mistrust. But the fact that natural heirs have either been

excluded or a lesser share has been given to them, by itself without

anything more, cannot be held to be a suspicious circumstance especially

in a case where the bequest has been made in favour of an offspring.”

88. The same principle was applied by the Supreme Court in Mahesh

Kumar (Dead) by LRs v. Vinod Kumar, (2012) 4 SCC 387,wherein it was

held that making a Will in favour of one son (the propounder), to the

exclusion of other sons, is not a suspicious circumstance when the

propounder had looked after his old aged parents while the other son had

never bothered about them. Since the children had neglected the father

during his last days, exclusion of other siblings and bequeathing entire estate

to only one child will not draw an inference of suspicion or invalidate the

will.

89. Likewise, in Hari Singh v. State, 2010 SCC OnLine Del 4269, the

Delhi High Court held that the mere disinheritance of natural heirs cannot,

by itself, constitute a suspicious circumstance. Moreover, Courts are not

expected to be satisfied that a bequeathal is rational or not; what has to be

considered is whether the bequest was so unnatural that the Testator could

not have made it. They have to be mindful of the fact that the Courts have to

uphold the wishes expressed and not the wisdom behind the same.

90. More recently, in Neelam Singh v. Dr Sudha Sinha, 2022 SCC

OnLineJhar 1231, it was held that the degree of proof and appreciation of

evidence is based on preponderance of probability, depending on the

evidence on record taken as a whole. Where there is overwhelming evidence

establishing the due execution of the Will, the mere exclusion of a natural

heir cannot invalidate it.

RFA 73/2025 Page 23 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 24]
91. In the present case, the material on record discloses a plausible

explanation for the disposition made under the Will. The relevant part of the

Will reads as under:

92. PW-1, Sh. Prem Chand, deposed that his brother, Sh. Subhash, had

been disowned by the Testator way back in 1996. He further deposed that all

the properties were self-acquired by the Testator, who was well within his

right to dispose of the same in any manner, to any person, for or without

consideration, in the manner prescribed under law. PW-1 also deposed that

he had borne all the medical expenses of the deceased and that the Testator

had declared the mode of transfer of his properties by executing the Will

RFA 73/2025 Page 24 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 25]
before the Sub-Registrar. The testimony of PW-1 is fully corroborated by

PW-2, Sh. Mahender Kumar, the other brother.

93. It has further emerged from the cross-examination of PW-1 that the

Testator had disclosed the reasons to the Sub-Registrar for not bequeathing

the properties to the other children. PW-3, Sh. D.K. Sharma, likewise

deposed that the Testator had told him that he was not giving the properties

to anyone else, as they were intending to sell the properties.

94. The evidence, therefore, consistently establishes that the Testator

himself furnished cogent reasons for the disposition made under the Will

and that the exclusion of the remaining heirs was a conscious and deliberate

decision on his part.

95. Much has been argued on behalf of the Appellants that PW-1 had

admitted in his cross-examination that the Testator had told him that he

should follow the instructions of elder brother, PW -2, Sh. Mahender

Kumar, and look after the properties after the deceased, and that he should

distribute the properties in equal proportions, as per the instructions of Sh.

Mahender Kumar, amongst the brothers.

96. The said admission, however, does not advance the case of the

Appellants. The honest statement of PW-1 reflects that there was no

manipulation or undue influence exerted upon the Testator, but it was the

Testator who intentionally bequeathed all the properties to the Petitioner.

The Testator may have desired that the Petitioner, after his demise, must

take care of the brothers and also effect an equitable distribution, but that

was his wish and not the contents of the bequest, wherein all the movable

and immovable properties were bequeathed to the Petitioner.

RFA 73/2025 Page 25 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 26]
97. The evidence consistently indicates that the deceased intended to

preserve his estate and consciously chose to bequeath the same in favour of

Prem Chand. The Appellants have not produced any cogent material to

establish that the disposition was the result of coercion, undue influence, or

any circumstance inconsistent with the free volition of the deceased. Their

challenge rests primarily upon the fact of exclusion itself, which, in law, is

insufficient to dislodge an otherwise, valid testament.

98. Consequently, the exclusion of the remaining legal heirs cannot, in

the facts and circumstances of the present case, be regarded as an

unexplained suspicious circumstance, so as to cast any doubt upon the

genuineness or validity of the Will.

(c) Reference to the one Karkardooma property and not the other

properties owned by the Testator:

99. The Appellants have further contended that the specific mention

ofonly one land comprised in Khasra No.331 Min., Village Karkardooma,

and not the other properties in the Will itself renders the testament doubtful,

since the said land had admittedly been acquired by the Delhi Development

Authority decades prior to the execution of the Will.

100. PW-1, Prem Chand, deposed that this Karkardooma property stood in

the name of the deceased, at the time when the Will was executed. He,

however, admitted that possession thereof had already been taken over by

the Delhi Development Authority pursuant to acquisition proceedings

undertaken during the years 1970-71. PW-1 further denied that the deceased

had already received compensation in respect of the acquired land.

101. The fact that one of the properties referred to in the Will had earlier

been acquired by the Delhi Development Authority does not, by itself, cast

RFA 73/2025 Page 26 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 27]
any doubt upon the validity of the testament. Even assuming that the said

property did not ultimately form part of the estate available for succession,

its inclusion cannot invalidate an otherwise duly proved Will or constitute a

suspicious circumstance affecting its genuineness.

102. Besides specifically referring to the land situated in Village

Karkardooma, the Will also contained a general bequest in respect of all

movable and immovable assets belonging to the Testator, including his bank

accounts and properties which might thereafter devolve upon Prem Chand.

While the Testator may not have specified the details of the other movable

and immovable properties in the Will itself, the details of the same have

been furnished by PW-1 in his testimony as Schedule A, Ex. PW-1/4. The

Testator's intention to bequeath all his properties was clearly manifest in the

Will, the authenticity of which has been established by the Petitioner. Mere

non-mentioning of details of all the properties cannot take away the

voluntariness in the execution of the Will.

103. The issue before a Probate Court is not whether the Testator

possessed a valid title to every property mentioned in the Will, but whether

the testament truly represents his last testamentary intention; the

jurisdiction exercised in Probate proceedings is confined to determining the

genuineness and due execution of the Will. The questions relating to title,

ownership, acquisition proceedings or the extent of the interest of the

deceased in any particular property, lie outside the scope of probate

jurisdiction and are required to be adjudicated independently in appropriate

proceedings.

104. The jurisdiction of the Probate Court is confined to examining the

genuineness and validity of the testament and not disputes relating to title or

RFA 73/2025 Page 27 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 28]
ownership over the estate. In Sameer Kapoor v. State, (2020) 12 SCC 480,

the Supreme Court reiterated that probate proceedings are concerned only

with the proof of the Will and do not adjudicate proprietary rights in the

properties comprised therein.

105. Consequently, neither the inclusion of the acquired Karkardooma

property nor the non-specification of the remaining properties in the body of

the Will, constitutes a suspicious circumstance warranting rejection of the

testament.

(d) Effect of registration of the Will:

106. The Appellants have also contended that the learned Trial Court

attached undue significance to the fact that the Will, was registered.

107. It is well settled that registration is neither mandatory for the validity

of a Will nor sufficient, by itself, to prove its due execution and attestation.

Nevertheless, where a Will has otherwise been proved in accordance with

law, registration constitutes a relevant corroborative circumstance while

appreciating its genuineness.

108. In the present case, the registration of the Will does not stand in

isolation. PW-4, Sh. D.S. Rawat, UDC from the office of the Sub-Registrar,

Geeta Colony, Delhi, produced the original register and proved from the

official record that the Will was registered on 28.12.2005, vide Registration

No. 9595, Book No. III, Volume No. 723. The official registration record

duly corroborates the evidence of the attesting witnesses. No material has

been brought on record to suggest that the registration proceedings were

manipulated or that the official record was fabricated.

109. The learned Trial Court itself recorded an observation that no page

number was mentioned in the register produced by PW-4 and that although

RFA 73/2025 Page 28 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 29]
the Will was stated to be registered from pages 74 to 77, the Will actually

consisted of two pages. PW-4 explained that the said discrepancy of

pagination had occurred, on account of a typing error. The explanation is

satisfactory and the minor discrepancy does not affect the authenticity of the

official record, particularly when PW-4's testimony was confined to proving

the official record, which he duly produced.

110. Thus, the minor discrepancy regarding pagination of the Registration

Register,is satisfactorily explained and does not affect the authenticity of the

official record.

111. PW-4 further denied the suggestion that the Testator and the

witnesses had not appeared before the Sub-Registrar or that the formalities

were completed at the window. The Slip No. 41958 dated 28.12.2005

mentioned on the first page of the Will, with a corresponding entry in the

relevant register, independently corroborates the fact that the Will was

presented and registered on 28.12.2005.

112. Accordingly, although the registration of the Will cannot by itself

establish its validity, it furnishes an additional corroborative circumstance

which, when read together with the evidence proving the due execution and

attestation of the testament, lends further assurance to its genuineness.

113. Viewed cumulatively, none of the circumstances relied upon by the

Appellants, whether individually or collectively, give rise to any legitimate

suspicion regarding the execution or genuineness of the Will. The

circumstances relied upon stand either satisfactorily explained from the

evidence on record or are legally insufficient to invalidate an otherwise duly

proved testament. This Court, therefore, concurs with the finding of the

RFA 73/2025 Page 29 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 30]
learned ADJ that the Appellants have failed to establish the existence of

any suspicious circumstance warranting rejection of the Will.

IV. Whether prior partition was established from the evidence on record?

114. Considerable emphasis has also been laid by the Appellants upon the

plea that the deceased had already partitioned his properties amongst his

sons during his lifetime and that, consequently, no occasion survived for the

execution of the Will.

115. It is no doubt settled that a family arrangement or partition may be

oral and in such a case, no compulsory registration is required. In Kale v.

Deputy Director of Consolidation, (1976) 3 SCC 119, the Supreme Court

recognised that a family arrangement may be arrived at orally. However, the

party asserting such an arrangement must establish, by cogent evidence, that

a definite and concluded partition had in fact taken place and had thereafter

been acted upon by the parties.

116. In the present case, the plea of oral partition, remains wholly

unsubstantiated. The Appellants have failed to produce any

contemporaneous document, family settlement, memorandum, revenue

record or any other independent evidence, supporting the alleged partition.

Equally, none of the witnesses examined on behalf of the Appellants was

able to state with certainty the date, manner or terms of the alleged partition.

117. RW-1, Sh. Jagdish Prasad, deposed that their father, Sh. Nathu Ram

@ Nathu Singh, had divided the properties in his lifetime, amongst all the

legal heirs and that the possession of the respective parts and portions were

given to the respective shareholders as per his own sweet will and choice

and this fact had been told by Late Mr. Nathu Ram, to his relatives and

RFA 73/2025 Page 30 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 31]
friends. In his cross-examination, however, RW-1 was confronted with his

Written Statement, wherein there was no specific plea of oral partition. He

further admitted that no written Partition Deed or any other document

evidencing such partition had ever been executed.

118. Additionally, RW-3, Sh. Ram Phool Singh, in his cross-examination,

admitted that no partition ever took place in his presence, but that he was

informed by Sh. Nathu Ram that he had partitioned his properties amongst

his sons. Likewise, RW-2, Sh. Pyare Lal, admitted in his cross-examination

that there was no document prepared regarding the partition. He also did not

remember the year in which the properties were allegedly partitioned.

119. Thus, what emerges from the testimony and the admissions of the

Appellants' own witnesses, is that the brothers were residing in separate

portions, to which the Testator may have conceded or had no objection, but

merely because they were occupying different portions does not imply that

there was any partition, whether oral or otherwise, between the parties.

There may have been an arrangement where they were all living in the

respective portions, but there is not an iota of evidence to establish that any

concluded partition had ever taken place. The admissions made by the

Objectors themselves, undermine their plea.

120. The plea of prior oral partition, therefore, rests upon vague and

inconsistent assertions, unsupported by any cogent evidence.

V. Whether the impugned Judgment suffers from such illegality, perversity

or misappreciation of evidence as would warrant interference by this

Court.

RFA 73/2025 Page 31 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 32]
121. In view of the foregoing discussion, it is held that the Petitioner has

succeeded in proving the due execution and attestation of the Will in

accordance with Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 read with

Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The deceased Testator was in a

sound disposing state of mind at the time of execution of the testament.

None of the circumstances relied upon by the Appellants constitutes a

suspicious circumstance warranting rejection of the Will and the plea of

prior oral partition also remains wholly unsubstantiated.

122. The findings and the conclusions recorded by the learned ADJ are

founded upon proper appreciation of the evidence and are in consonance

with the settled principles governing proof of testamentary instruments. No

perversity, illegality or material irregularity has been demonstrated so as to

warrant interference in appellate jurisdiction. The impugned Judgment,

therefore, calls for no interference.

Conclusion:

123. In the light of the above discussion, the Judgment dated 15.11.2010 of

the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi, granting Probate of Will is

hereby, affirmed. The Appeal, being devoid of merit, is accordingly

dismissed.

124. Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of, accordingly.

(NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA)
JUDGE
AUGUST 04, 2026/RS

RFA 73/2025 Page 32 of 32

Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA