[PAGE 1]
Uses we Sewee-33004 / 2000 Soe REGISTERED NO. DL-33004/2000
% Brains
1A
Che Gazette of. Budia
, : EXTRAORDINARY
wT Ii — avg 1
PART II — Section 1
mire @ warfra
. PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
I
a 36] 3g feeat, YAR, SATE 25, 2000 / WE 3, 1922
" No. 36] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 25, 2000 / BHADRA 3, 1922
za um 8 fia ys Gen ct ondt ¢ fad fH ae orem Gaer Fw A ta a GS) .
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. :
oooeoeoeyeonaqywyqoea_=e=0—0—0—_—_©0—(0—oOoOoOWDWDOoO0T7T>E)RRR eee
MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 25th August, 2000/Bhadra 3, 1922 (Saka)
The folowing Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 25th
August, 2000, and is hereby published for general information:—
THE MADHYA PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2000
No. 28 oF 2000
‘ [25th August, 2000.]
AnActto provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Madhya
\ Pradesh and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as
Tollows:—
PART I
PRELIMINARY
1, This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000, Short title.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions
(a) "appointed day” means the day which the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint;

[PAGE 2]
“4 ro zat aan a wv Q *
20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part ii ,
(8) “article” means an articie of the Constitution;
(c) “assembly constituency”, “council constituency” and “parliamentary
constituency” have the same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, ~
1956; 43 of 4950.
(d) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission appointed by
the President under article 324;
(e) “existing State of Madhya Pradesh” means the State of Madhya Pradesh
as existing immediately before the appointed day;
‘ (f) “law” includes any enactment, erdinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule,
scheme, notification or other instrument having, immediately before the appointed
day, the force of law in the whole or in any part of the existing State of Madhya
Pradesh;
(g) “notified order” means an order published in the Official Gazette; ;
(h) “population ratio”, in relation to the States of Madhya Pradesh and
Chhaitisgarh means the raiio of 485.7:176.2;
. () “sitting inember", in relation te either House of Parliament or of the ,
Legislature of the exisiing State of Madhya Pradesh means a person who immediately
before the appointed day, is a member of that House:
(Gj) “successor State”, in relation to the existing State of Madhya Pradesh ,
means the State of Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh;
{k) “iransfeired territory” means the territory which oa the appcinted day is
- teansferred from the existing State of Madhya Pradesh to the State of Chhattisgarh;
(/) “treasury” includes a sub-ireasury; and
‘ (mt) any reference toa district, tehsil or other territorial division of the existing
State of Madhya Pradesh shall be construed as a reference to the area comprised
within that territorial division on the appointed day.
PART I
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF MapHYA PRADESH
Formation of 3. On and frora the appointed day, there shall be formed a new State to be known as
Chhettisgar:, = the State of Chhattisgarh comprising the following territories of the existing State of Madhya
State. Pradesh, namely:—
Bastar, Bilaspur, Dantewada, Dhamitari, Durg, Janjgir-Champa, Jashpur, Kankev,
Kawardha, Korda, Koriya, Mahasaraund, Raigarh, Raipur, Rajnandgaon and Surguia
districts, ’
and thereupon the said territories shall ceare to form part of the existing State of Madhya
Pradesh.
State of 4, On and from the appointed day, the State of Madhya Pradesh shal! comprise the
Madhya territories of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh other than those specified in section 3.
Pradesh and .
lerritorial
divisions :
theresf.
Amendment of 5, On and frorr the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Constitution, under
the First the heading “I. THE STATES”,—
Schedule to
the (a) in the paragraph relating to the territovies of the State of Madhva Pradesh,
Constitution. after the words, backets and figures “the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh (Transfer
of Territories) Act, 1959," the following shall be added, aamely:— 47 of 1959.

[PAGE 3]
‘ .
Sec. 1) THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
“but excluding the territories specified in section 3 of the Madhya
Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000”;
(b) after entry 25, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“26, Chhattisgarh: The territories specified in section 3 of the Madhya
Pradesh Reorganisation Act,-2000.”.

6 Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be deemed to affect the Saving powers .
power of the Government of Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh to alter, after the appointed of the State
day, the name, area or boundaries of any district or other territorial division in the State, Gevernment.

PART J
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
The Council of States
7. On and frora the appointed day, in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Amendment
Table,— , of the Fourth
Schedule to the
. (a) entries 9 to 27 shall be renumbered as entires 10 to 28 respectively; Constitution.
(6) in entry 8, for the figures “16”, the figures “11” shall be substituted;
' (c) after eniry 8, the following entry shail be inserted, namely :-—
“9, Chhattisgarh 0... 57.

8. (/) On and from the appointed day, the sixteen sitting members of the Council of —Ailocation of |
States representing the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall be deerned to have been _ Sitting
elected (o fill the seats allotted to the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, as embers.
specified in the First Schedule to this Act.

(2) The teem of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered, -

The House of the Peopie

9, On and from the appcinted day, there shall be allocated 29 seats to the successor —_Xepresentation

State of Madhya Pradesh, and 11 to the successor State of Chhattisgarh, in the House of the " ne House of
44 of 1950. People, and the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 shal} be the People.
deemed to be amended accordingly.

10. Oa and fromm the appointed day, the Delimitation of Parliamentary andAssembly Delimitation of
Constituencies Order, 1976, shail stand amended as directed in the Second Schedule fo Parliamentary
this Ac and Assembly

us Act. constituencies,

A. (2) Every sitting member of the House of the People representing aconstitency Provision as to
which, on the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 10, stands allotted, ens
with cr without alteration of boundaries, to the successor States of Madhya Pradesh or "#48.
Chhattisgarh, shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that
constituency as so allotted.

(2) The tenn of office of such sitting members sha!l remain unaltered.

The Legislative Assembly
12, (7) The number of seats as on the appointed day ia the Legislative Assemblies arisen as
~ ; ae . ; . t ative
of the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh shall be two auncred and thirty and Asseublies.
mnety respectively.
43 of 1950. (2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, under
heading “Y. States” —-
(2) entries 5 to 25 shall be rerambered as entries 6 to 26 respectively;
(2) after entry 4, the following entry shal! be inserted, namely:—
To 5
5. Chhattisgara oo. cceesseeeesesccsteaeese sees seca IO

[PAGE 4]
= OOOO eee SSS
(c) in entry 13, as so renumbered, for the figures “320”, the figures 230”
shall be substituted.
Allocation of 13. (/) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of
ane Madhya Pradesh elected to fill a seat in that Assembly from a constituency which on the
members. appointed day by virme of the provisions of section 10 stands allotted, with or without
alteration of boundaries, to the State of Chhattisgarh shall, on and from that day, cease to
be a member of the Legislative Assembly of Madhya Pradesh and shall be deemed to have
been elected to fill a seat in the Legislative Assembly of Chhattisgarh from that constituency
so allotted.
(2) All other sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of
Madhya Pradesh shall continue to be members of the Legislative Assembly of that State
and any such sitting member representing a constituency the extent, or the name and extent
of which are altered by virtue of the provisions of section 9 shall be deemed to have been
elected to the Legislative Assembly of Madhya Pradesh by that constituency as so altered.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
the Legislative Assemblies of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh shall be deemed to be
duly constituted on the appointed day.

(4) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Madhya
Pradesh nominated to that Assembly under article 333 to represent the Anglo-Indian
community shali be deemed to have been nominated to represent the said community in
the Legislative Assembly of Madhya Pradesh under that article.

Duration of 14, The period of five years referred to in clause (1) of article 172, shall, in.the case

Legislative of Legislative Assembly of the State of Madhya Pradesh and the State of Chhattisgarh be

Assemblies, deemed to have commenced on the date on which it actually commenced in the case of
Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh.

Speakers and 15, (/) The persons who immediately before the appointed day are the Speaker and

Deputy Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shal!

Speakers. continue to be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of that Assembly on and from
that day.

(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative Assembly of the
successor State of Chhattisgarh shall choose two members of that Assembly to be
respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and until they are so chosen, the duties
of the office of the Speaker shall be performed by such member of the Assembly as the

: : Governor may appcint for the purpose.
Rules of 16. The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative Assembly of
procedure. Madhya Pradesh as in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until rules are
made under clause (1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of
the Legislative Assembly of the State of Chhattisgarh, subject to such modifications and
adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof.
Delimitation of constituencies
Delimitation of 17. (J) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of section 12, the Election
constituencies. Commission shail determine in the manner hereinafter provided-—
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Madhya Pradesh and
Chhattisgarh, respectively having regard to the relevant provisions of the Constitution;
(b) the assembly constituencies into which each State referred to in clause (a)
shall be divided, the extent of each of such constituencies and in which of them seats
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes; and

[PAGE 5]
. Src. I J THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries and description of the. extent of the
parliamentary constituencies in each State referred to in clause (a) that may be
necessary or expedient.
(2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses (8) and (c) of sub-section (/),
the Election Commission shal! have regard to the following provisions, namely:—
(a) all the constituencies shall be single-member constituencies;
(b) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact
areas, and in delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features, existing
boundaries of administrative units, facilities of communication and conveniences to
the public; and
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion
of their population to the total population is the largest.
(3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the performance
of its functions under sub-section (/), associate with itself as associate members, five persons
as the Centra! Government may, by order specify, being persons who are members of the
Legislative Assembly of the State or of the House of the People representing the State:
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any
decision of the Election Commission. ;
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant,
it shall be filled as far as practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3).
(5) The Election Commission shall—~
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together with
the dissenting proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication
thereof in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the Commission may
consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to
the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be further
considered by it;
: (b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by
it before the date so specified; and
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been
Tecejved by it before the date so specified, determine by one or more orders the
delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or orders to be published in the
Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or orders shal! have the full
force of !aw and shail not be called in question in any court.
(6) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to assembly
constituencies shal! be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the concerned State.
(7) The delimitation of constituencies in the States of Madhya Pradesh and .
: Chhattisgarh shall be determined on the basis of the published figures of the census taken
in the year 1971.
18. (/) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Power of the
Official Gazette,— Election
. . . . Commission
. (a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section !7 or any — to maintain
error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission; and Delimitation
. , _. Orders up-to-
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any — date.
such order or orders is or are altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-date.
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency shal!
be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the concerned Legislative Assembly.

[PAGE 6]
' .
6 THE GAZBITE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (Part Ti—
a EEUU A EATRAC ———_____ ART AT
ec eee ee
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Amendment of 19. On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order,
the Scheduled 1950, shall stand arnended as directed in the Third Schedule.
Castes Order.
Amendment of 20, On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order,
the Scheduled 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Fourth Schedule.
Trides Order.
PART IV
Hicu Courr
High Court of 23. (/) As from the appointed day, there shall be a Separate High Court for the State .
Chhattisgarh. of Chhattisgarh (hereinafter-referred to as "the High Court of Chhattisgarh") and the High
Court of Madhya Pradesh shall become the High Court for the State of Madhya Pradesh
(hereinafter referred to as the High Court of Madhya Pradesh).
(2) The principal seat of High Court of Chhattisgarh shall be at such Place as the
President may, dy notified order, appoint. :
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Judges and division
courts of the High Court of Chhattisgarh may sit at such other place or places in the State of
Chhattisgarh other than its principal seat as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the
Governer of Chhattisgarh, appoint. '
Judges of 22, (7) Such of the Judges of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh holding office
Chhattisgarh immediately before the appointed day as may be determined by the President shall on that
High Court. day cease to be Judges of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh and become Judges of the
High Court of Chhattisgarh,
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub-section (/) become Judges of the High Court of
Chhattisgarh shall, except in the case where any such person is appointed to be the Chief
Justice of that High Court, rank in that Court according to the priority of their respactive
appointments as Judges of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh,
Jurisdiction of 23. The High Court of Chhattisgarh shall have, in respect of any part of the territories
Eeaisearh included in the State of Chhaitisgazh, al! such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, ander
gh Court, the law in force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect io that
pari cf the said territories by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.
Special 24, (1) On and from the appointed day, in the Advocates Act, 1961, in section 3, in 25 of 1951.
provision sub-section (J), in clause (¢), fer the words “and Madhya Pradesh”, the words "Madhya
gti r . n aoe
teiating © Bar pradesh and Chhattisgarh” shall be subsiituied. .
Council and advocates. (2) Any person whe immediately before the appointed day is an advocate on the coll
of the Bar Council of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh may give his option in writing,
within one year froma the appointed day to the Bar Council of such existing State, to transfer
his name on the reil of the Ber Council of Chhattisgarh and notwithstanding anything
coniained in the Advocates Act, 1961 and the rules made thereundes, on such option 30 25 of 1961,
given his name shall be deemsd to have been transferred on the roll of the Bar Council of
Chhattisgarh with effect from the date of the option so given for the purposes of the said
Act and the rules made thereunder.
(3) The persons other than the advocates who are entitled immediately before the
appointed day, to practise in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh or any subordinate court
thereof shall, on and after the appointed Gay, be recognised as such persons entitled also to
Practise in the High Court of Chhattisgarh or any subordinate court thereof, as the case may
be.
(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Chhattisgarh shali be regulated in
accordance with the like principles as immediately before the appointed day are in force
with respect to the right of audience in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh. j
SES}

[PAGE 7]
‘ ‘ Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7

25. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the !aw in force immediately before the Practice and
appointed day with respect Lo practice and procedure in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh precede a
shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Chhattisgarh, High Conn,
and accordingly, the High Court of Chhattisgarh shall have all such powers to make rules
and orders with respect to practice and procedure as are immediately before the appointed
day exercisable by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh: ,

Provided that any rules or orders which: are in force imraediately before the appointed
day with tespect to practice and procedure in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh shall,
until vazied or revoked by rules or orders made by the High Court of Chhattisgarh, apply .
with the necessary modifications in relation to practice and procedure in the High Court of
Chhattisgarh as if made by that Court.

26. The iaw in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the custody Custody of seat
of the seai of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh shall, with the necessary modifications, of
apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Chhattisgarh. Huh Coat

27, The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the form Form of writs
of writs and other processes used, issued o7 awarded by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh and other

. shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other P*Cessesprocesses used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Chhattisgarh.

28. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to the powers of powers of

; the Chief Justice, single Judge and division courts of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh Judges.
and with respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shail, with the
necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Chhattisgarh.

29. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to appeals to the — Procedure as to
Suprerne Court from the High Court of Madhya Pradesh and the Judges and division courts appeals io
thereof shall, with the necessary modifications, epply in relation to the High Court of cuPreme

: Chhattisgarh. ; ,
30, (7) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court of Madbya Pradesh shall, as Transfer of
from the appointed day, have na jurisdiction in respect of the transferred territory. proceedings
fiom Madhya
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh immediately Pradesh High
before the appointed day as are certified, whether before of after that day, by the Chief Conrt te
Justice of that High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and Hye
other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be héard and decided by the High
Court of Chhattisgarh shall, as soon as may be afier such certification, be transferred to the
High Court of Chhattisgarh,
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sud-sections (/) and (2) of this section or
in section 23, but save as hereinafter provided. the High Court of Madhya Pradesh shall
: have, and the High Court of Chhattisgarh shall noi have, juvisdiction to entertain, hear or
dispose of appeais, applications for leave to che Supreme Court, applications for review
and other proceedings where any such proceadings seek any relief in respect of any order
: passed by the High Ccurt of Madhya Pradesh before the appointed day;
Provided that if after any such proceedings have ocen entertained by ihe High Court
of Madhya Pradesh, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be
transferred to the High Court of Chhattisgarh, he shall order that they shall te so transferred,
and such proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.
(4) Any order made by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh—
(a) before the. appointed day, in any proceedings transfeired to the High Court
of Chhattisgarh by virtue of sub-section (2); or
(d) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of Madhya Pradesh .
retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (2),

[PAGE 8]
,
8g THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr Il—
—————————————— rr
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order-of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh,
but also as an order made by the High Court of Chhattisgarh.
Right to appear 31. Any person, who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled
or to act in to practise or any other persons entitled to practise in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh
proceedings and was authorised to appear in any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the
transferred to . r : . : : .
Chhattisgarh High Court of Chhattisgarh under section 30, shall have the right to appear in the High
High Court. Court of Chhattisgarh in relation to those proceedings.
Interpretation. 32. For the purposes of section 30——
(a) proceedings shail be deerned to be pending in a Court until that Court has
disposed of all issues between the parties, including any issues with respect to the
taxation of the costs of the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for
leave to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions
for writs; and
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a
Judge or division court thereof, and references to an order. made by a Court or a
: Judge shall be construed as including references to a sentence, judgment or decree .
passed or made by that Court or Judge.
Saving. 33. Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Chhattisgarh
of any provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision :
that may be made on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any
Legislature or other authority having power to make such provision.
PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES ;
Authorisation 34. The Governor of Madhya Pradesh may, at any time before the appointed day, )
° expenditure authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Chhattisgarh as he
Chhattis garh deems necessary for any period not more than six months beginning with the appointed day
State. pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Chhattisgarh:
Provided that the Governor of Chhattisgarh may, after the appointed day, authorise
such further expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of
Chhattisgarh for any period not extending beyond the said period of six months.
Reports 35. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India referred to in
relating to clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the State of Madhya Pradesh in respect
Madhya of of any period prior to the appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each of the
Pradesh State, Successor States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh who shall cause them to be laid
before the Legislature of that State.
(2) The President may by order—
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of Madhya :
Pradesh on any service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the
financial year or in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted
for that service and for that year as disclosed in the reports referred to in sub-section
(1) to have been duly authorised; and
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said
reports.
Distribution of -36. The President shall, by order, determine the share of the States of Madhya
revenue, Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in the total amouni payable to the existing State of Madhya
Pradesh on the recommendation of the Finance Commission constituted under article
280 of the Constitution, in such manner as he thinks fit.

[PAGE 9]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
a Oe Eee
PART VI
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

37.(/) The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment of the Application of :
assets and liabilities of the State of Madhya Pradesh immediately before the appointed — Part.
day.

(2) The successor State shall be entitled to receive benefits arising out of the decisions
taken by the predecessor State and the successor States shall be liable to bear the financial
liabilities arising out of the decisions taken by the existing State of Madhya Pradesh.

(3) The apportionment of assets and Habilities would be subject to such financial
adjustment as may be necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable apportionment of
the assets and liabilities amongst the successor States.

(4) Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall be settled
through mutual agreement, failing which by order by the Central Government on the advice
of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

38. (/) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles and Land and

: other goods belonging to the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall,— goods.

(a) if within the transferred territory, pass to the State of Chhattisgarh; or
(b) in any other case, remain the property of the State of Madhya Pradesh:

. Provided that any land, stores, articles or other goods may be distributed otherwise
than in accordance with the situation of such land, stores, articles or goods by rnutual
agreement between the successor States, failing which the Central Government may, on
the request of any of the Governments of the successor States and after consulting both the

' Governments of the successor States, issue directions for the just and equitable distribution
of such land, stores, articles or goods between the successor States and the land, stores,
articles or goods shail accordingly pass to the successor States:

Provided further that in case of the distribution, of any land, stores, articles and
goods or class of goods under this sub-section located outside the existing State of Madhya
Pradesh, such distribution shall be made through mutual agreement arrived at between the
Governments of the successor States for that purpose, failing which the Central Government
may, on request by any of the Governments of the successor States, after consulting both
the Governments of the successor States, issue such direction as it may deem fit for the
distribution of such land, stores, articles and goods or class of geods, as the case may be,
under this sub-section.

(2) Stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in particular institutions,
workshops or undertakings or on particular works under construction, shall pass to the
successor States in whose territories such institutions, workshops, undertakings or works

: are located.

(3) Stores relating to the Secretartat and offices of Heads of Departments having
jurisdiction over the whole of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall be divided between

: the successor States in accordance with the mutual agreement arrived at between the
Government of the successor States for that purpose, failing which the Central Government
may, on request by any of the Governments of the successor States, after consulting both
the Governments of the successor States, issue such direction as it may deem fit for the

distribution of such stores or any part of such stores, as the case may be.

(4) Any other unissued stores of any class in the existing State of Madhya Pradesh
shall be divided between the successor States in proportion to the total stores of that class
purchased in the period of three years prior to the appointed day, for the territories of the
existing State of Madhya Pradesh included respectively in each of the successor States:

Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in respect of any class of
stores or where the value of any class of such stores does not exceed rupees ten thousand,
that class of stores shall be divided between the successor States according to the population
ratio.

[PAGE 10]
‘
10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Parr H—
ma EEA EAE RAORDINART (Part
eae eT
(2) In this section, the expression "land" includes immovable property of every kind
and any rights in or over such property, and the expression "goods" does not include coins,
bank notes and currency notes.
Treasury and 39. The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the State of Madhya Pradesh
bank balances. and the credit balances of the State with Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India or ©
any other bank immediately before the appointed day shall be divided between the States
of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh according to the population ratio:
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash
balances from any treasury to any other treasury and the apportionment shall be effected by
adjusting the credit balances of the two States in the books of the Reserve Bank of India on
the appointed day:
Provided further that if the State of Chhattisgarh has no account on the appointed
day with the Reserve Bank of India, the adjustment shall be made in such manner as the
Central Government may, by order, direct.
Arrears of 40. The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on Property, including arrears of
taxes. land revenue, shall belong to the successor State in which the property is situated, and the
right to recover arrears of any other tax or duty shall belong to the successor State in whose ‘
territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed day.
Right to 41. (/) The right of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh to recover any loans or
recover loans advances made before the appointed day te any local body, society, agriculturist or other :
and advances. person in an area within that State shall belong to the successor State in which that area is
included on that day. :
(2) The right of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh to recover any loans or advances
made before the appointed day to any person cr institution outside that State shall beleng
to the State of Madhya Pradesh:
Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan or advance shall be
divided between the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh according to the population
ratio, .
Tavestments 42, (1) The securities held in respect of the investments made from Cash Balances
and credits in Investment Account or ‘rom any Fund in the Public Account of the existing State of Madhya
cenain ie0S" Pradesh as specified in the Fifth Schedule to this Act shall be apportioned in the ratio of
population of the successor States:
Provided that the securities he!d in investments made from the Calamity Relief Fund
of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shal! be divided in the ratio of the area Of the
territories occupied by the successor Staies:
Provided further that the balance in the Reserve Funds ia the Public Account of
Madhya Pradesh created wholly out of appropriations from the Consolidated Fund of the
existing State of Madhya Pradesh, to the extent the balances have act been invested outside
Government account, shall not be carried forward to similar Reserve Funds in the Public
Account of, successor States:
Provided also that the balances in any other Reserve Funds, excluding those specified
in sub-section (2), shall ve allocated between the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh
in the ratio of populaticn of those States.
(2) The investments of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh immediately before the
appointed day in any special fund the objects of which are confined to a local area shall
belong to the State in which that area is included on the appointed day.
(3) The investments of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh immediately before the
appointed day in any private, commercial or industrial undertaking, in so far as suck
investments have not been made or are deemed not to have been made from the cash balance
investment account, shall pass to the State in which the principal seat of business of the |
undertaking is located. |
l

[PAGE 11]
Sec. 1 J THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY It
eo: oe —

(4) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial
Act for the existing State of Madhya Pradesh or any part thereof has, by virtue of the
provisions of Part IT of this Act, become an inter-State body corporate, the investments in,
or loans or advances to, any such body corporate by the existing State of Madhya Pradesh
made before the appointed day shall; save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this
Act, be divided between the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in the same proportion
in which the assets of the body corporate are divided under the provisions of this Part,

43. (/) The assets and liabilities relating to any undertaking of the existing State of Asseis and
Madhya Pradesh whether directly owned or through a body corporate constituted or _ liabilities of
incorporated or registered under any Central, State or Provincial Act, shall,— State ki

uncestaking
(a) if exclusively located in a successor State, pass to the successor State, and

where a depreciation reserve is maintained by. the existing State of Madhya Pradesh

for such undertaking, the securities held in respect of investment made from that

fund shat! also pass to such successor State;

(b) where any such undertaking or part thereof is tocated, in more than one
successor State, the assets, liabilities and securities shal! be divided in such manner
as may be agreed upon between the successor States within a period of two years
. from the appointed day or in failure of such agreement as the Central Government
may by order direct.
(2) An agreement entered into between the successor States, or order made by the
, Central Government under sub-section (/) may provide for the dissolution of the
undertaking or transfer or re-employment of any employee of the undertaking to or by the
successor States, subject to the provisions of section 62. |

(3) An agreement entered into between the successor States, or order made by the
Central Government under sub-section (/) may also provide for the transfer of the assets
and liabilities which would otherwise have passed to a successor State to any other
undertaking of that successor State; and any employee of the undertaking referred to in
sub-section (/), who would otherwise have been transferred to or re-employed by a
successor State, may be transferred to or be re-employed by such undertaking instead of
that successor State.

44, (1) All liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account of the existing Public Debt
Staite of Madhya Pradesh outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall be
apportioned in the ratio of population of the successor States unless a different mode of
apportionment is provided under the provisions of this Act.

(2) The individual items of Nabilities te be allocated to the suecessor States and the
amount of contribution required to be made by pne successor State to another shall be
such as may be ordered by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptrolier
and Auditor-General of India:

Provided that ill such orders are issued, the liabilities en account of Public Debt and
Public Account of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall continue to be the liabilities
of the suceessor State of Madhya Pradesh.

(3) The liability on account of loans raised from any sourec and re-lent by the existing
State of Madhya Pradesh to such entities as may be specified by the Central Government
and whose area of operation is confined to either of the successor States shall devolve on
the respective States as specified in sub-section (4).

(4) The Public Debt of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh attributable to loan
taken from any source for the express purpose of re-lending the same to a specific institution
and outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall—

(a) if re-lent to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any local area,
be the debt of the Siate in which the local area is included on the appointed day; or

(b) if re-lent to the Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board, the Madhya Pradesh :
State Road Transport Corporation, or the Madhya Pradesh Housing Board or any

[PAGE 12]
12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY fPaxr Il—
other institution which becomes an inter-State institution on the appointed day, be
divided between the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in the same
proportion in which the assets of such body corporate or institution are divided under
the provisions of Part VII of this Act.

(5) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained by the existing State
of Madhya Pradesh for repayment of any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect of
investments made from that fund shall be divided between the successor States of Madhya
Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in the same proportion in which the total public debt is divided
between the two States under this section.

(6) In this section, the expression “Government security” means a security created
and issued by a State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any
of the forms specified in, or prescribed under clause (2) of section 2 of the Public Debt
Act, 1944. 18 of 1944,

Floating loans 45, All liabilities of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh of any floating loan to
provide short term finance to any local body, body corporate or other institution shall be

determined by mutual agreement between the successor States, failing which the Central ,

Government shall determine such liability betweeri the successor States in consultation

with such States.

Refund of 46. The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh to refund any tax or duty on

laxes collected property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor

ID EXCESS. State in whose territories the property is situated, and the liability of the existing State of
Madhya Pradesh to refund any other tax or duty collected in excess shall be the liability of
the successor State in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included.

Deposits, etc 47. (1) The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh in respect of any civil
deposit or local fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in
whose area the deposit has been made

(2) The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh in respect of any charitable
or other endowment shail, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose
area the institution entitled to the benefit of the endowment is located or of the State to
which the objects of the endowment, under the terms thereof, are confined.

Provident 48. The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh in respect of the provident

fund. fund account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that
day, be the liability of the State to which that Government servaat is permanently allotted.

Pensions. 49, The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh in respect of pensions shall
pass to, or be apportioned between the successor States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh
in accordance with the provisions contained in the Sixth Schedule to this Act.

Contracts. 50. (/) Where. before the appointed day, the éxisting State of Madhya Pradesh has
made any contract in the exercise of ils execuitve power for any purposes of the State, that
contract shal! be deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive power—

(a) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from the appointed day, exclusive
purposes of e:ther of the successor States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh,
then, of that State; or

(b) in ary other case, of the State of Madhya Pradesh,

all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue under any such contract shall,

to the extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the existing State of

Madhya Pradesh, be rights or liabilities of the State of Chhattisgarh or the State of Madhya

Pradesh, as the case may be: :

Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause (b), the initial allocation of
rights and liabilities made by this sub-section shall be subject to such financial adjustment
as may be agreed uron between the successor States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh
or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by otder, direct.

[PAGE 13]
Sec. | } THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the
.liabiliies which have accrued or may accrue under any contract
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal
in proceedings relating ta the contract; and
(b) any liabilily in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any

such proceedings.

(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating
to the apportionment of fiabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial
obligations; and bank balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of
the nature of contractual rights, be dealt with under those provisions.

51, Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Madhya Liability in
Pradesh is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong other than breach of _ respect of
contract, that liability shall, ~ actionable

wrong.
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories which, as from that
day, are the territories of ether of the successor States of Madhya Pradesh or
Chhattisgarh, be a liability of that successor State; and
(5) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Madhya Pradesh, but

subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of

Madhya Pradesh and Chhatlisgarh or, in default of such agreement, as the Central

Government may, by order, direct. .

52, Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Madhya Liability as
Pradesh is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co-operative society guarantor.
or other person, that lability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall—

(a) if the area of operations of such society or persons is limited to the territories
which, as from that day, are the territories of either of the States of Madhya Pradesh
or Chhattisgarh, be a liability of that successor State; and

(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Madhya Pradesh,

subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of

Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh or, in default of such agreements, as the Centra!

Government may, by order, direct.

53. If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of the — hems in
nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in suspense.
accordance with that provision, :

54, The benefit or burden of any asset or liabitity of the existing State of Madhya _ Residuary
Pradesh not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the State of — provision.
Madhya Pradesh in the first instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed
upon between the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh or, in default of such
agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.

55, Where the successor States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh agree that the Apportionment
asset, liability or benefit or burden of any particular assct or liability should be apportioned of assets or
between them in a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this {i@>ilites hed
Part, then, notwithstanding anything contained therein, the assets, liability or benefit or bereement:
burden of that asset or liability shall be apportioned in the manner agreed upon.

56. Where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the successor States Power of
of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits Central
or becomes subject to any liability, and the Central Government is of opinion, ona reference Goverment to
made within a period of three years from the appointed day by either of the States, thal itis allocation or
just and equitable that property or those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, — adjustment in
the other successor State, or that a contribution towards that liability should be made by the certain cases.

[PAGE 14]
14 THE GAZBTYE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Parr H— ,
other successor State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner between
the two States, or the other State shall make to the State subject to the liability such
contribution in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the
two State Governments, by order determine. ~
Certain 57, All sums payable either by the State of Madhya Pradesh or by the State of
expendituze to ~~ Chhattisgarh to the other States or by the Central Government to either of those States, by
oe chatzed on virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State
Fund. by which such sums are payable or, as the case maybe, the Consolidated Fund of India.
: PART VII
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS
Provisions as $8. (2) The following bodies corporate constituted for the existing State of Madhya
to Madhya Pradesh, namely:—
Pradesh State
Electricity (a) the State Electricity Board constituted under the Electricity Supply Act,
Board, State 1948, 54 of 1948.
Road |
‘Transport (b) the State Road Trans port Corporation established under the Road Transport |
Corporation Corporations Act, 1959; and 64 of 1950. . |
and State .
Warehousing (c) the State Warehousing Corporation established under the Warehousing )
Corporation, - Corporations Act, 1962, - 58 of 1962. |
shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of |
which they were functioning immediately before that day, subject to the provisions of this |
section and arrangements for the functioning of such body corporates as may be mutually
agreed upon between the successor States failing which to such directions as may, from
time to time, be issued by the Central Government:
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub-section (/) in respect
of the Board or the Corporation shall include a direction that the Act under which the
Beard or the Corporation was constituted shall, in its application to that Board or
; Corporation, have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as the Central
Government thinks fit. ‘
(3) The Board or the Corporation referred to in sub-section (/) shall cease to function
as from, and shall be deemed to be dissolved on such date as the Central Government may, .
by order, appoint; and upon such dissolution, its assets, rights and liabilities shall be
apportioned between the successor States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in such
manner as may be agreed upon between them within one year of the dissolution of the
Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, or if no agreement is reached, in such
manner as the Central Government may, by order, determine:
Provided that any liabilities of the said Board relating to the unpaid dues of the coal :
supplied to the Board by any public sector coal company shail be provisionally apportioned
between the successor organisations constituted respectively in the successor States of the
existing State of Madhya Pradesh or after the date appointed for the dissolution of the
Board under this sub-section in such manner as may be agreed upon between the
Governments of the successor States within one month of such dissolution or if no agreement
is reached, in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, determine subject to
reconciliation and finalisation of the liabilities which shall be completed within three months .
from the date of such dissolution by the mutual agreement between the successor States or
failing such agreement by the direction of the Central Government:
Provided further that an interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the Cash
Credit interest shall be paid on outstanding unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the Board
by the public sector coal company till the liquidation of such dues by the concerned successor
organisauons constituted in the successor States on or after the date appointed for the
dissolution of the Board under this sub-section.

[PAGE 15]
Sec. | } THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15
eee eee EZ as
(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing
the Government of the State of Madhya Pradesh or, as the case may be, the Government of
the State of Chhattisgarh from constituting, at any time on or after the appointed day, a
State Electricity Board or a State Road Transport Corporation or a State Warehousing
Corporation for the State under the provisions of the Act relating to such Board or
Corporation; and if such a Board or Corporation is so constituted in either of the States
before the dissolution of the Board or the Corporation referred to in sub-section (/),—
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Government enabling the
new Board or the new Corporation to take over from the existing Board or Corporation
all or any of its undertakings, assets, rights and liabilities in that State, and
(&) upon the dissolution of existing Board or Corporation, ——
()) any assets, rights and liabilities which would otherwise have passed
to that State by or under the provisions of sub-section (3) shall pass to the new
Board or the new Corporation instead of to that State;
(4) any employee who would otherwise have been transferred to or rey employed by that State under sub-section (3), read with clause () of sub-section
(), shall be transferred to or re-employed by the new Board or the new
Corporation instead of to or by that State, :
‘ (5) An agreement entered into between the successor States under sub-section (3)
and an order made by the Central Government under that sub-section or under clause (a)
of sub-section (4) may provide for the wansfer or re-employment of any employee of the
Board or the Corporation referred to in sub-section (/),— ;
() to or by the successor States, in the case of an agreement under sub-section
(4) or an order made under that sub-section;
(i) to or by the new Board or the new Corporation constituted under subsection (4), in the case of an order made under clause (a) of that sub-section,
and, subject to the provisions cf sectian 64, also for the terms’ and conditions of service
applicable to such emplovees after such transfer or re-employment.
59, (1) The Madhya Pradesh State Financial Corporation established under the State Provisions as
63 of 1951 Financial Corporation Act, 1951 shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function . Hare
. : ~ ye so. . . . radesh State
in those areas in respect of which it was functioning immediately before that day, subject pinancial
‘ to the provisions of this section and to such directions as may frotn time to time, be issued — Cerporation.
by the Central Governmeni after consultation with the Governments of the successor States.
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub-section (7) in respect
of the Corporation may include a direction that the said Act, in its application to the
Corporation, shall have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be
specified in the directicn.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), the
Board of Directors of the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Centra!
Government and shall. if'so required by the Central Government, convene at any time after
the appointed day a meeting for the consideration of a scheme for the reconstitution or
reorganisation or dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation, including proposals
regarding the formation of new Corporations, and the transfer thereto of the assets, rights
and liabilities of the existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at the general
meeting by a resolution passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the
scheme shall be submitted to the Central Government for its sanction.
(4) [F the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either without
modifications or with modifications which are approved at a general meeting, the Central
Government shall certify the scheme, and upon such certification, the scheme shall,

[PAGE 16]
16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part Il—
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time being in force,
be binding on the corporations affected by the scheme as well as the shareholders and
creditors thereof.

(5) If the scheme is nol so approved or sanctioned, the Central Government may
refer the scheme to such Judge of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh as may be nominated
in this behalf by the Chief Justice thereof, and the decision of the Judge in regard to the
scheme shail be final and shall be binding on the corporations affected by the scheme as
well as the shareholders and creditors thereof.

(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing
the Government of the Statc of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh from constituting, at
any time on or after the appointed day, a State Financial Corporation for that State under
the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951. 63 of 195k.

Provisions as 60. (J) Notwithsianding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Part,

to certain each of the companies specified in the Seventh Schedule to this Act shall, on and from the

companies appointed day and unti! otherwise provided for in any law, or in any agreement among the
successor States, or: any direction issued by the Central Government, continue to function
in the areas in which it was functioning immediately before that day; and the Central
Government may, aftcr consultation with the Governments of the successor States, from
time to time issue such directions in relation to such functioning as it may deem fit,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956, or in any 1 of 1956.
other law.

(2) Any directions issued under sub-section (/), in respect of a company referred to
in that sub-section, may include directions— .

(a) regarding the division of the imerests and shares of existing State of Madhya

Pradesh in the company among the successor States;

(b) requiring the reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the company so
| as to give adequate representation to both the successor States.
Functioning of 61. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Part
: organisalion, or any other law for the Ume being in force, any organisation, registered society or trust,
| registered rust incorporated at the achest of the State Government, shall, on and from the appointed day,
sociciy OF . : . . - . . . :
incorporated. and until otherwise provided lor in any taw for the lime being in force, of in any agreement
on behest of between the successor States, or in any direction issued by the Central Government in
State consultation with the successor States, continue to function in the areas in which it was
Government. functioning immediately befcre that day, and the Central Government may, after consulting
the Governments of the successor States, issue directions in relation to such functioning.
| (2) Any directions issued under sub-section (/) may include directions regarding the—
| (i) reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the organisation, society or trust
by whatever name it may be called; or
(i) appointment of the Chief Executive by whatever name it may be called; or
(iii) regulations or bye laws, by whatever name they may be called; or
| 1 (iv) assessment and apportionment of financial sugport, if any, provided by the
existing State of Madhya Pradesh for meeting fixed charges.
General 62, (7) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the foregoing provisions of this
Provisions as Part, where any body corporaie constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act
| corporations for the existing State of Madhya Pradesh or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions
| "of Part Il of this Act, become an inter-State body corporate, then, the body carporate shall,
on and from the appointed day, continue lo function and operate in those areas in respect
of which it was funclioning and operating immediately before that day, subject to such
directions as may from ‘ime ‘9 time be issued by the Central Government, after consultation
| with the Governments of the successor States, until other provision is made by law in
| respect of the said body corporate. - 4

[PAGE 17]
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub-section (/) in respect
of any such body corporate shall include a direction that any law by which the said body
corporate is governed shall, in its application to that body corporate, have effect subject to
such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the direction. :
63. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 88 of the Motor Vehicles Temporary
59 of 1988. Act, 1988, a permit granted by the State Transport Authority of the existing State of provisions as :
Madhya Pradesh or any Regional Transport Authority in that State shall, if such permit '° continuarice
was, immediately before the appointed day, valid and effective in any area in the transferred oviting road
territory, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area after that day subject transport
to the provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area; and it shall not be permits. ;
necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by the State Transport Authority of
Chhattisgarh or any Regional Transport Authority therein for the purpose of validating it
for use in such area:
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the successor
State Government or Governments concerned add to, amend or vary the conditions
attached to the permit by the Authority by which the permit was granted.
(2) No tolls, entrance fces or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the
. appointed day in respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in any of the successor
States under any such permit, if such vehicle was, immediately before that day, exempt
from the payment of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges for its operations in the
> transferred territory: ; :
a Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State as
Government or Governments concerned, authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance fees
or other charges, as the case may be.
64. Where on account of the reorganisation of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh _ Special
under this Act, any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial provisions
Act, any co-operative society registered under any law relating to co-operative societies or relating to
any commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is reconstituted or reorganised in vmpencetion
any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other body corporate, co-operative — in certain
society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitution, cases.
reorganisation, amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such body
corporate or in any such co-operative society or undertaking, is transferred to, or Teemployed by any other body corporate, or in any other co-operative society or undertaking,
then notwithstanding anything contained in section 25F, section 25FF or section 25FFF of
14 of 1947. the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, such transfer or re-employment shall not entitle him to
any compensation under that section:
Provided that—
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such
' transfer or re-employment are not less favourable to the workman than those applicable
to him immediately before the transfer or re-employment,
Ey (b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co-operative society or
' the undertaking where the workman is transferred or re-employed is, by agreement
or otherwise, legally liable to pay to the workmaa, in the event of his retrenchment,
compensation under section 25F, section 25FF or section 25FFF of the Industrial
14 of 1947. Disputes Act, 1947 on the basis that his service has been continuous and has not
been interrupted by the transfer or re-employment.
65. Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body corporate carrying on any — Special
business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies corporate provisions as
which after the transfer carry on the same business, the losses or profits or gains sustained {© 'ncometax ;
by the body corporate first mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed
to be carried forward and set off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the
43 of 1961. Income-tax Act, 1961, shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in
accordance with the rules to be made by the Central Government in this behalf and, upon
such apportionment, the share of loss allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be :

[PAGE 18]
18 THE ( GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Part Ti~ ‘
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the said Act, as if the transferee
body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a business carried on by it in the years in
which these losses were sustained.
Continuance of $6 (J) The Government of State of Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh, as the case
facilites in may be, shall, in respect of the institutions specified in the Eighth Schedule to this Act,
nattutinns. located in that State, continue to provide facilities to the people of the other State which
shali not, in any respect, be less favourable to such people than what were being provided
to them before the appointed day, for such period and upon such terms and conditions as
may be agreed upon between the two State Governments within a period of one year from
the appointed day or if no agrcement is reached within the said petind of one year, then, as
may be fixed by order of the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government may, at any time within a period of one year from the
appointed day, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in the Eighth Schedule any .
other institution existing on the appointed day in the States of Madhya Pradesh and
Chhattisgarh and on the issue of such notification, the Schedule shall be deemed to be
amended by the inclusion of the said institution therein.
PART Vill
: PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES .
Provisions 67. (1) In this section, the expression “State cadre”—
relating to All- . . . 4 . . . .
India Services. (a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned '
to it in the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in
the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;
(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in
the Indian Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966.
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service, Indian Police Service
and Indian Forest Service for the existing State of Madhya Pradesh, there shall, on and
from the appointed day, be two separate cadres, one for the State of Madhya Pradesh and
the other for the State of Chhattisgarh in respect of each of these services.
(3) The initial strength and composition of the State cadres referred to in subsection (2) shall be such a3 the Central Government may, by order, determine before the
appointed day.
(4) The members of each of the said service borne on the PMadhya Pradesh cadre
thereof immediately before the appointed day shall be aliocated to the State cadres of the :
same service constituted under sub-section (2) in such manner and with effect from such
date or dates as the Central Government may, by order, specify.
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on of after the
appointed day, of the All-India Service Act, 1951, or the rules made thereunder. 63 of 1951,
Provisions 68. (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is serving in .
relating to connection with the affairs of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shell, on and from that
Natwa day provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Madhya
aanya . . . +
Pradesh and Pradesh unless he is required, by general or special order of the Central Government to
Chhattisgarh. serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of the State of Chhattisgarh:
Provided that no direction shall be issued under this section after the expiry of a
period of one year from the appointed day.
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by
general or special order, determine the successor State to which every person referred to in
sub-section (/) shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from which such
ailotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect.

[PAGE 19]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 :

(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub-section (2) toa
successor State shall, if he is not already serving therein be made available for serving in :

. the successor State from such date as may be agreed upon between the Governments
concerned or in default of such agreement, as may be determined by ihe Central Government, i

69. (!) Nothing in this section or section 68 shall be deemed to affect on or afterthe Provisions
appointed day the operation of the provisions of Chapter ] of Part XTV of the Constitution __ relating to :
in relation to determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection "B&F Services.
with the affairs of the Union or any State:

Provided that the conditions of service applicable imrnediately before the appointed |
day in the case of any person deemed to have been allocated to the State of Madhya Pradesh |
or to the State of Chhattisgarh under section 68 shal! not be varied to his disadvantage |
except with the previous approval of the Central Government.

(2) All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person—

(a) if he is deemed to have been allocated to any State under section 68, shall

be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of that State;

. (6) if he is deemed to have been allocated to the Union in connection with the
administration of the Chhattisgarh shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection

with the affairs of the Union, ea, fo te

‘ for the purposes of the rules regulating his conditions of service.

(3) The provisions of section 68, shall not apply in relation to members of any |

All-India Service. . |
70. (4) Every person who, immediately before the appointed day is holding or Provisions as |
discharging duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs of the existing State cfenen |
. . wae BS
of Madhya Pradesh in any area which on that day falls within any of the successor States same post. "
shall continue to hold the same post or office in that successor State, and shall be deemed, |
on and from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government
of, or any other appropriate authority in, that successor State: |
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deerned to prevent a competent authority, |
on and from the appointed day, from passing in relation to such person any order affecting |
the continuance in such post or office. |
74, The Central Government may, by order establish one or more Advisory Advisory |
Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to— Committees.
(a) the discharge of any of its functions under this Part; and |
(6) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the |
provisions of this Part and the proper consideration of any representations made by
' such persons.
72, The Central Government may, give such directions to the State Government of _ Power of
Madhya Pradesh and the State Government of Chhattisgarh as may appear to it to be oe tt
no = : oe . ne oO
j necessary for the purposs of Biving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the give directions. ;
State Governments shall comply with such directions.
73. (1) The Public Service Commission for the existing State of Madhya Pradesh Provisions as
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the Public Service Commission for the State of eee Public
Madhya Pradesh. : Commission.
(2) The persons holding office immediately before the appointed day as Chairman or
other member of the Public Service Commission for the existing State of Madhya Pradesh
shall, as from the appointed day, be the Chairman or, as the case may be, the other member
of the Public Service Commission for the State of Madhya Pradesh,
(3) Every person who becomes Chairman or other member of the Public Service
Commission for the State of Madhya Pradesh on the appointed day under sub-section (2),
shall—

[PAGE 20]
20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr H—
ee —————— a
(a) be entitled to receive from the Government of the State of Madhya Pradesh
conditions of service not less favourable than those to which he was entitled under

the provisions applicable to him,

‘ (b) subject to the proviso to clause (2) of article 316, hold office or continue
to hold office until the expiration of his term of office as determined under the
provisions applicable to him immediately before the appointed day.

(4) The report of the Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission as to the work
done by the Commission in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be
presented under Clause (2) of article 323 to the Governors of the States of Madhya Pradesh
and Chhattisgarh, and the Governor of the State of Madhya Pradesh shall, on receipt of
such report, cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining as far as
possible, as respects the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted,
the reasons for suchnon-acceptance to be laid before the Legis!ature of the State of Madhya
Pradesh and it shall not be necessary to cause such report or any such memorandum io be
laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State of Chhattisgarh.

Jurisdiction of 74. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, every
the Commis- Commission, Authority, Tribunal, University, Board or any other body constituted under a
sions, Author Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act and having jurisdiction over the existing State of
bonals. Madhya Pradesh shall on and from the appointed day continue to function in the successor
State of Madhya Pradesh and also exercise jurisdiction as existed before the appointed day over
the State of Chhattisgarh for a maximum period of two years from the appointed day or till ‘
such period as is decided by mutual agreement between the successor States— .
(@ to continue such body as a joint body for the successor States; or
(if) to abolish it, on the expiry of that period, for either of the successor States; or
(ii) to constitute aseparate commission, Authority, Tribunal, University, Board
or any other body, as the case may be, for the State of Chhattisgarh,
whichever is earlier.

(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shail be instituted, incase such bedy is abolished
under clause (i) of sub-section (2), by any employee of such bedy against the termination
of his appointment or for the enforcement of any service conditions or for securing
absorption in alternative public employment against the Central Gevernment or any of the
successor States.

(3) Notwithsianding anything contained in any law for the time being in force or in
any judgment, decree or order of any court or Tribunal or contract or agreement, any
Chairman or member of any body abolished under clause (#2) of sub-section (J) shall not
be entitled 1o any compensation for the unexpired period of his tenure.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or anv law for the time being
in force, the Central Government shall, in accordance with any mutual agreement between
the successor States or if there is no such agreement, after consultation with the Governments
of the suocessor States, issue directions for the resolution of any matter relating to any
body referred to in sub-section (1) and falling within the jurisdiction of any of the successor :
States within any period referred to in sub-section (2).

PART IX
MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF POWER AND WATER RESOURCES
Management 48, (J) Where it appears to the Central Government thai the arrangemeat inregard to
of power and _ the generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water for any area or in regard
water supply + ‘ . a sae ‘
aeain oes 19 to the execution of any project for such generation or supply has been or is likety to be,
modified to the disadvantage of that area by reason of the formation of successor States,
the Central Goverment may, after consultation with the successor States, give such
directions to the State Government or other authority responsible for the maintenance, so
far as practicable, of such arrangement before the appointed day.

[PAGE 21]
Sec. 1 ] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21
ee nn eETEeeveerTe—e
eer

(2) The Central Government shall within a period of three months from the appointed
day, by ordér, also determine the share of the successor States in the entitlement of the
existing State of Madhya Pradesh to power produced by the Central Government
undertakings having due regard to the likely disadvantage which might have been occasioned
to any successor State as a result of modified arrangements for generation and supply of
electric power.

76. (7) The Central Government may, as and when it considers necessary, constitute Imer-State
an inter-State River Water Board, after consultation with the successor States, for the nie Meter
planning and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys. .

(2) The Inter-State River Board constituted under sub-section (7} may be entrusted

: with the following functions, namely:—
(a) to examine the requirement of funds for various projects according to the
prograrnmes laid down for such projects and to advise regarding the apportionment

of the expenditure to the State participating to implement such programmes keeping

in view the agreement on the sharing of costs;

(b) to decide the sharing and withdrawal of water from the reserviors for
: irrigation, power and other purposes with a view to securing better use of available
, water; .
(c) to determine the programmes of re-settlement of displaced persons as a
result of the projects; and
(d) to approve and supervise the planning, survey and investigation, preparation

of project reports and construction of joint inter-State projects and their subsequent

operation and maintenance.
PART X
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

77, On and irom the appointed day, in section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act, Amendment of
1956, in clause (2), for the words “Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh”, the words “Uttar Act 37 of
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh” shall be substituted, 1956.

78, The provisions of Part II of this Act shall not be deemed to have effected any Territorial
change in the territories to which any jaw in force immediately before the appointed day extent of laws.
extends or applies, and territorial references in any such jaw to the State of Madhya Pradesh
shall, until otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other.competent authority be
constituted as meaning the territories within the existing State of Madhya Pradesh before
the appointed day.

79, For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of Madhya — Power to adapt
Pradesh or Chhattisgarh of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate laws.
Government may, before the expiration of two years from that day, by order, make such
adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may
be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the
adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent
legislature or other competent authority.

Explanation.—in this section, the expressien “appropriate Government” means as
respects any law relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government,
and as respects any other law in its application to a State, the State Government.

80. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made under Power to
section 79 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or construe laws.
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating
its application in relation to the State of Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh, construe the law
in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard
to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority.

[PAGE 22]
22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Past Ti—
Power to name 81. The Government of the State of Chhattisgarh, as respects the transferred territory
authorities may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the authority, officer or person who, on
exercising or after the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise such functions exercisable under
statutory any lawin force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification and such law shal}
functions. have effect accordingly.
Legal — 82. Where immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Madhya
proceedings. Pradesh is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities
subject to apportionment between the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh under
; this Act, the State of Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh which succeeds to, er acquires a
share in, that property or those rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act
shall be deemed to be substituted for the existing State of Madhya Pradesh or added as a
party to those proceedings, and the proceedings may continue accordingly.
Transfer of 83. (1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the appointed day before a
Pending . court (including High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which on that day
P 8S falls within the State of Madhya Pradesh shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to
the territory, which as from that day are the territories of Chhattisgarh State, stand transferred
to the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer of the State of Chhattisgarh. .
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred
under sub-section (1), it shall be referred to the High Court of Madhya Pradesh and the ,
decision of that High Court shail be ftnal. :
(3) In this section—
(a) “proceeding” includes any suit, case or appeal; and
(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer” in the State of
Chhattisgarh means—
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the
proceeding would have laid if it-had been instituted after the appointed day; or
(i#) in case of deubt, such court, tribunal, authority, or officer in the State
of Chhaitisgarh, as may be determined after the appointed day by the
Government of that State or the Central Government, as the case may be, or
before the appointed day by the Government of the existing State of Madhya
Pradesh to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.
Right of 84, Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader
Pleaders to entitled to practise in any subordinate courts in the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall,
aa eain cases for a period of one year frorn that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those courts, ;
notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those
courts has been transferred to the State of Chhattisgarh.
Effect of 85. The provisions of this Act shal] have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent 5
provisions of therewith contained in any other law.
the Act
inconsistent
with other
laws.
Power to 8. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
remove President may, by order, do anything not iaconsistent with such provisions which appears
difficulties. to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years
from the appointed day.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, before each House of Parliament.

[PAGE 23]
‘ Sec} ] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 8)
(1) Of the five sitting members whose term of office will expire on the 9th day of
April, 2002, namely Shri Lakkhiram Agrawal, Shri Surendra Kumar Singh, Shri Sikandar
Bakhi, Shri Suresh Pachouri and Shri Abdul Gayur Qureshi; Shri Lakkhiram Agrawal and
Shri Surendra Kumar Singh shall be deemed to have been elected to fill Gwo of the seats
allotted to the State of Chhattisgarh and other three sitting members shall be deemed to
have been elected to fill three of the seats allotted to the State of Madhya Pradesh.
(2) Of the five sitting members whose term of office will expire on the 30ih day of
June, 2004, namely Shri O. Rajagopal, Shri Dilip Singh Judev, Shri Jnumuklal Bhendia,
Shri Balkavi Bairagi and Miss Mabel Rebello; Shri Dilip Singh Judev and Shri Jnumuklal
Bherdia both shall be deemed to have been elected to fill (wo of the seats allotted to the
State of Chhattisgarh and other three sitting members shall be deemed to have been
elected to fill three of the seats allotted to the Stale of Madhya Pradesh.
, (3) Of the six members whose term of office will expire on the 2nd day of April,
2006, namely, Shri Arjun Singh, Shri Kailash Joshi, Shri Bhagatram Manhar, Shri Hansraj
Bhardwaj, Shri PK. Maheshwari and Shri Vikram Verma, Shri Bhagatram Manhar, shall
be deemed to have been elected to fill the one. of the seats allotted to the State of
, Chhattisgarh and other five members shall be deemed to have been elected to fill the five
seats allotted to the State of Madhya Pradesh. ;

[PAGE 24]
24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Parr Il—
THE SECOND SCHEDULE :
(See section 10)
1. AMENDMENTS TO THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND
ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES ORDER, 1976
In the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976,—
1. in Schedule XT,—
Gi) In PART-A-Parliamentary Constituencies— ; |
(a) serial numbers 12 to 22 (both inclusive) and entries relating thereto
shali be omitted;
(b) in serial number 10, the following figures, words, brackets and letters
shall be omitted, namely:—
“87-Manendragath (ST)” and “88—Baikunthpur”.
(ii) In PART. B—Assembly Constituencies, serial numbers 87 to 176 (both
inclusive) and entries relating thereto shall be omitted.
2. after Schedule XII, the following Schedule shall be inserted, namely:—
“SCHEDULE XTIA
CHHATTISGARH
PART A.—PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES
Serial No. Name and extent of constituency :
() (2)
1. Surguja (ST)—2. Baikunthpur, 3. Premnagar (ST), 4. Surajpur (ST), 5. Pal (ST),
6. Samri (ST), 7. Lundra (ST), 8. Pilkha (ST), 9. Ambikapur (ST) and 10. Sitapur
(ST).
2. Raigarh (ST)--11. Bagicha (ST), 12. Jashpur (ST), 13. Tapkara (ST),
14, Pathalgaon (ST), 15. Dharamjaigarh (ST), 16. Lailunga (ST), 17. Raigarh
and 18. Kharsia.
3. Janjgir—21. Rampur (ST), 22. Katghora, 23. Tanakhar (ST), 32. Mastuiri (SC),
33, Sipat, 34. Akaltara, 36. Champa and 37. Sakti.
4. Bilaspur (SC)—-1. Manendragarh (ST), 24. Marwahi (ST), 25. Kota, 26. Lormi, .
27. Mungeli (SC), 28. Jarhagaon (SC), 29. Takhatpur, 30. Bilaspur and 31. Bilha.
5. Sarangarh (SC)—19. Saria, 20. Sarangarh (SC), 35. Pamgarh, 38. Malkharoda
(SC), 39. Chandrapur, 48. Pallari (SC), 49. Kasdol and 50. Bhatgaon (SC).
6. Raipyr—40-Raipur Town, 41. Raipur Rural, 42. Abhanpur, 43. Mandirhasod,
44, Arang (SC), 45. Dharsiwa, 46. Bhatapara and 47. Baloda Bazar.
7. Mahasamund—s3. Saraipali, 54. Basna, 55. Khallari, 56. Mahasamund, 51.
Rajini, 52. Bindranawagarh (ST), 58. Kurud and 59. Dhamtari.
8. Kanker (ST)—-57-Sihawa (ST), 60. Bhanupratappur (ST), 61. Kanker (ST),
63. Keskala (ST), 62. Narayanpur (ST), 79. Gunderdehi, 81, Balod and 82. Dondi
Lohara (ST).
9. Bastar (ST)—64-Kondagaon (ST), 65. Bhanpuri (ST), 66. Jagdalpur (ST),
67. Keslur (ST), 68. Chitrakote (ST), 69. Dentewera (ST), 70. Konta (ST) and
71. Bijapur (ST).

[PAGE 25]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 :
; Serial No. Name and extent of constituency :
(1) ea)
Pa
10. Durg—72-Maro (SC), 73. Bemetara, 74. Saja, 75. Dhamdha, 76. Durg, 77, Bhilai,
78. Patan and 80. Khertha.
11. Rajnandgaon—83-Chowki (ST), 84. Khujji, 85. Dongargaon, 86. Rajnandgaon,
87. Dongargarh (SC), 88. Khairgarh, 89. Birendranagar and 90. Kawardina. ,
PART B.—-AssEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES
KORIA DISTRICT
1. Manendragarh (ST)—Bharatpur tahsi! and Manendragath tahsil (excluding PC. : |
15 ia Khadgawan RIC) and the forest villages in the area. |
2. Baikunthpur-—Baikunthpir tahsil and the forest villages in the area and P.C. 15
in Khadgawan RIC in Manendragarh tahsil. ; |
SURGUJA DISTRICT
3. Premnagar (ST).—Premnagar RIC and Ramamujnagar RIC (excluding PCs. 73
. to 80) in Surajpur tahsil and Udaipur RIC and PCs. 55, 57, 58 and 65 in Lakhanpur
: RIC in Ambikapur tahsil and the forest villages in the area. ‘
4, Surajpur (ST)—Suraj put and Bhaiyathan RICs and PCs. 73 to 80 in
Ramanujanagar RIC and Chandramedha RIC (excluding PCs. 17 to 26) in Surajpur
tahsil.
5, Pal (ST}—Basantpur, Ramchandrapur and Chailgali RICs and Ramanujganj Town
and PCs. 32 to 34A and 34B in Balrampur RIC in Pal tahsil. ‘
6. Samri(ST)—Samri tahsil and the forest villages in the area, and Balrampur RIC
(excluding Ramanujganj Town and PCs. 32 to 34A and 34B) in Pal tahsil.
7. Lundra (S'f)}—Lundra and Raipur RICsin Ambikapur tahsil and the forest villages
in the area and PCs. 39 to 42 in Pratappur RIC in Surajpur tahsil.
8, Pilkha (ST)— Pilkha RIC, Pratappur (excluding P.Cs. 39 to 42), and PCs. 17 to
26 in Chandramedha RIC in Surajpur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
9. Ambikapur (ST)—Ambikapur-I and Ambikapur-II RICs. and Lakhanpur RIC
(excluding P.Cs. 55, 57, 58 and 65) in Ambikapur tahsil and the forest viliages in
the area.
10... Sitapur (ST)—Sitapur and Batauli RICs in Ambikapur tahsil.
JASHPUR DISTRICT
, il. Bagicha (ST)— Bagicha and Sanna RICs in Jashpur tahsil and the forest villages
in the area.
12. Jashpur (ST}—Jashpur and Kastura RICs and P.Cs 78 to 82 and 98 in Kunkuri
RIC in Jashpur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
13. Tapkara (ST)—Tapkara RIC and Kunkuri RIC (excluding P.Cs. 78 to 82 and 98) ,
in Jashpur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
14, Pathalgaon (ST)— Pathalgaon RIC and Kapu RIC (excluding P.Cs. | to 6 and :
36) in Udaipur (Dharamjaigarh) tahsil.

[PAGE 26]
26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Pas7 [i— ‘ .
Serial No. Name and extent of constituency
a) (2)
RAIGARH DISTRICT
15. Dhararajaigarh (ST)— Dharamjaigarh RIC and PCs. | to 6 and 36 in Kapé RIC
in Udeipur (Dinaramjaigarh) tahsil and Gharghoda RIC in Gharghoda tahsi} and
the forest villages in the area. ;
16. Lailunga (ST)— Lailunga and Tamnar RICs in Gharghada tahsil and the forest
villages in the area. -
\7. Raigarh—Raigarh-I and Raigarh-II RICs and P.Cs. 44 to 52 in Pussour RIC in
Raigarh tahsil. .
18. Kharsia—Kharsia and Bhupdeopur RICs in Raigarh tahsil.
i9, Saria—Pussour RIC (excluding PCs. 44 to 52) in Raigarh tahsil and Saria and
Baramkela RICs in Sarangarh tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
20. Sarangarh (ST)—Sarangarh and Hardi RICs in Sarangarh tahsil and the forest ,
villages in the area. :
KORBA DISTRICT :
, 21. Rampur (ST)— Korba RIC (excluding Korba Town and PC. 21) Rampur RIC
(excluding PCs. 73 to 80) and P.Cs. 14, 20,22 and 30 in Tanakhar RIC in Katghora
tahsil,
22. Katghora—Koroa Town and P.C. 21 in Korba RIC, Katghora RIC and Pali RIC
(excluding P.Cs. 34 and 36 to 46) in Katghora iahsil.
23. Tanakhar (ST)— Pasan RIC, Tanakhar RIC (excluding PCs. 14, 20, 22 and 30) :
and PCs, 34 and 36 to 46 in Pali RIC in Katghora tahsil.
BILASPUR DISTRICT
24. Marwahi (ST)—Marwahi RIC, Gaurella RIC (excludiag PCs. 26 to 28) and
P.Cs. 31 to 33 and 37 in Kota RIC in Bilaspur tahsii.
25. Kota—PCs. 26 to 28 in Gaurella RIC, Kota RIC (excluding PCs. 31 to 33 and
37) and PCs. 64 to 67 in Ghutku-I RIC in Bilaspur tahisil and the forest villages
in the area.
26. Lormi— Lormi RIC (excluding BCs. $2 to t4, 17, 35 and 36) and Pandaria RIC
in Mungeli tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
27. Miungeli (ST)-—Mungeli and Kunda RICs and PCs. 17, 35 and 36 in Lormi RIC .
in Mungeli tahsil.
28, Jarhagaon (SC)—P.Cs. 12 to [4 in Lormi RIC, and Jarhagaon RIC and Patharia
RIC (excluding PCs. 84 io 91) in Mungeli tahsil.
29, Takhatpur—Takhatpur RIC, Ghutku-{T RIC (excluding PC. 96) and Ghutke-I
RIC (excluding P.Cs. 64 to 67, 78 to 80, 97 and 98) in Bilaspur tahsil.
30. Bilaspur—Bilaspur Town including Railway Colony and PCs. 109, 1 {0-A and
110-B in Bilaspur RIC in Bilaspur tahsil.
31. Bitha—Bilhz RIC and PCs. 94, 95, 112 and 117 in Bilaspur RIC in Bilaspur
tahsil and P.Cs. 81 to 91 in Patharia RIC in Mungeli tahsil.
32, Masturi (SC)—Masturi RIC, P.Cs. 111, 130 and 131 in Bilaspur RIC and PCs.
133, 135 and 136 in Sipat (Nargoda) RIC in Bilaspur tansil.
33, Sipat—Sipat (Nargoda) RIC (excluding P.Cs. 133, 135 and 136), PCs. 107, 108

[PAGE 27]
Sec. 1} THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27
ae
Seana SannTnnnnnEnEEEERnnereereeenmeee ee
Serial No. Name and extent of constituency
a en extent oF Constituency ——
() (2) ;
a
and 132 in Bilaspur RIC, P.Cs. 78 to 80, 97 and 98 in Ghutku-I RIC and PC 96 in
Ghutku-I RIC in Bilaspur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
JANJGIR-CHAMPA DISTRICT
, 34, Akaltara—Baloda RIC and Akaltara RIC (excluding P.Cs. 58 and 60) in Janjgir
tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
35. Pamgarh—Pamgarh and Nawagarh RICs, PCs. 58 and 60 in Akaltara RIC and
PCs. 50, 52. and 53 in Janjgir RIC in Janjgir tahsil.
36. Champa—Champa RIC and Janjgir RIC (excluding P.Cs. 50, 52 and 53) inJanjgir
tahsil.
. 37. Sakti—Sakti RIC in Sakti tahsil and PCs. 73 to 80 in Rampur RIC in Katghora
tahsil,
38. Malkharoda (SC)—Jaijaipur RIC and Malkharoda RIC (excluding P.Cs. 51, 52,
57, 59 and 60) in Sakti tahsil.
39. Chandrapur—Chandrapur RIC and P.Cs. 51, 52, 57, 59 and 60 in Malkharoda
RIC in Sakti tahsil.
RAIPUR DISTRICT
40. Raipur Town—Raipur town (excluding wards 20 to 24, 29, 30, 34 and 35 and
non-ward municipal area).
41, Raipur Rural—Wards 20 to 24, 29, 30, 34 and 35 in Raipur town including nonward municipal area, Raipur-II RIC and Raipur-I RIC (excluding PCs. 111, 112
and 115) in Raipur tahsil.
42. Abhanpur—-Abhanper and Nawapara RICs in Raipur tahsil.
43. Mandirhasod~~Mandirhasod RIC and PCs. 111, 112 and 115 in Raipur-I RIC in :
Raipur tahsil. ;
44, Arang (SC)---Araag and Kharora RICs in Raipur tahsil. -
45. Dharsiwa—Dharsiwa-!, Dharsiwa-II and Tilda RICs in Raipur tahsil.
46. Bhatapara—Simga RIC and Bhaiapara RIC (excluding PCs. 34 to 38) in Baloda
Bazar tahsil.
47. Baloda Bazar-—P.Cs. 34 to 38 in Bhatapara RIC and Baloda Bazar and Jarod
RICs in Balcda Bazar tahsil.
48. Pallari (SC)—-Pallari and Lawan RICs in Baloda Bazar tahsil and the forest villages
in the area,
49. Kasdol—Kasdol and Bilaigarh RICs in Baloda Bazar tahsil and the forest villages
in the area.
50. Bhatgaon (SC)—Bhatgaon RIC in Baloda Bazar tahsil and the forest villages in
the area and Bhanwarpur RIC in Mahasamund tahsil.
51. Rajim—Rajim RIC, Chhura RIC (excluding P.Cs. 31 to 35) and P.Cs. 36 to 39, .
44 and 42 in Gariaband RIC ia Bindranawagarh tashil. |
52, Bindranawagarh (ST)—Deobhog RIC, Gariaband RIC (excluding P.Cs. 36 to |

[PAGE 28]
28 _THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ (Pav Ih

G) (2)

a
39, 41 and 42) and PCs. 31 to 35 in Chhura RIC in Bindranawagarh tahsil and
the forest’ villages in the area.
MAHASAMUND DISTRICT
53. Saraipati—Saraipali and Khamharpali RICs Mahasamund tahsil.
54, Basna—Basna RIC and Pithora RIC (excluding P.Cs. 25 to 28) in Mahasamund :
tahsil and the forest villages in the area. .
55. Khallari—Khallari and Komakhan RICs and PCs. 25 to 2c in Pithora RIC in
Mahasamund tahsil and the forest villages in the area. :
56. Mahasamund—Mahasamund and Patewa RICs in Mahasamund tahsi! and the
forest villages in the area.
DHAMTARI DISTRICT
57. Sihawa (ST)—Sihawa RIC and Dhamtari RIC (excluding Dhamtari town and PCs.
50 to 52) in Dhamtari tahsil and the forest villages in the area. ‘
58. Kurad——Kumud and Magarlod RICs in Dhamtari tahsil and the forest villages in
the area. .
59. Dhamtari—Bhothali RIC, Dhamtari town and P.Cs. 50 to 52 in Dhamtari RIC in :
Dhamtari tashil.
KANKER DISTRICT
60. Bhanupratappur (ST}—-Bhanupratappur tahsil and Charama RIC (excluding P.Cs.
2 and 13 to 16) and PCs, 20 to 24 and 26 in Kanker RIC in Kanker tahsil.
61. Kanker (ST)—Narharpur RIC, PCs. 2 and 13 to 16 in Charama RIC and Kanker :
RIC (excluding P.Cs. 20 to 24 and 26) in Kanker tahsil.
62. Narayanpar (ST)—Koilibeda and Antagarh RICs and P.Cs, 23 to 25 in
Narayanpur RIC in Narayanpur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
BASTAR DISTRICT ;

63. Keskal (ST)—Keskal RIC and P.Cs. 19 to 26 in Pharsgaon RIC in Kondagaon
tahsil and the forest villages in the area.

64. Kondagaon:(ST)—Pharasgaon RIC (excluding P.Cs. 19 to 26) and Kondagaon
RIC (excluding P.Cs. 35 and 37 to 43) in Kondagaon tahsil and the forest villages
in the area and Narayanpur RIC (excluding P.Cs. 23 to 25) in Narayanpur tahsil.

65. Bhanpuri (ST)—Bhanpuri RIC and P.C. 38 in Bakawand RIC in Jagdalpur tahsil
and PCs. 35 and 37 to 43 in Kondagaon RIC in Kondagaon tahsil and the forest
villages in the area.

66, Jagdatpur (ST)—Bakawand RIC (excluding P.C. 38), Jagdalpur (BY RIC and
Jagdalpur (A) RIC (excluding PCs. 54 to 59) in Jagdalpur tahsil and the forest
villages in the area. .

67. Keslur (ST)—P.Cs. 54 to 59 in Jagdalpur (A) RIC and Keslur RIC in Jagdalpur
tahsil and the-forest villages in the area and P.Cs. 7 to 9 in Chindgarh RIC in
Konta tashil. : :

68. Chitrakote (ST)—Chitrakote RIC in Jagdalpur tahsil and P.Cs, 1 to9 in Danteware
RIC in Dantesvara tahsil and the forest villages in the area.

DANTEWARA DISTRICT ;

69. Dantewara (ST)—Dantewara tahsil (excluding P.Cs. | to 9 Dantewara RIC) and

the forest villages in the area.

[PAGE 29]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29
Sec ee
en nn
Serial No. Name and extent of constituency
(i) ; (2)
a
5 ; |
70. Konta (ST)—Konta tahsil (excluding PCs. 7 to 9 in Chindgarh RIC) and the |
forest villages in the area,
71. Bijapur (ST)—Bijapur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
DURG DISTRICT
72. Maro (SC)—Maro and Nawagarh RICs and P.Cs. 46, 51, 52 and 55 to 57 in |
Khandsara RIC in Bemetara tahsil. |
43. Bemetara—Bemetara and Anandgaon RiCs and PCs. 47 to 50, 53 to 34 in |
Khandsara RIC in Bemetara tahsil. |
74. Saja—Saja and Deokar RICs and Khandsara RIC (excluding P.Cs. 46 to 57) in
Bernetara tahsil. |
; 75. Dhamdha—Dhamdha and Nankathi RICs and P.Cs. 46 to 48 and 50 to 52 in |
Bhilai RIC in Durg tahsil. |
76. Durg—Durg-i and Durg-Il RICs and S.A.F. Colony, Kosa Nala, Supela Bazar |
West, Supela Bazar, Supela Bazar East and Supela Camp West in Bhilainagar and |
ex-revenue village Chhaoni lying on the periphery of Bhilainagar in Bhilai RIC in |
Durg tahsil. |
77. Bhilai—-Bhilainagar (excluding S.A.F. Colony, Kosa Nala, Supela Bazar West,
Supela Bazar, Supela Bazar East, Supela Camp West and ex-revenue village Chhaoni
lying on the periphery of Bhilainagar) in Bhitai RIC in Durg tahsil.
78, Patan—Bhilai RIC (excluding P.Cs. 46 to 48 and 50 to 52 and Bhilainagar) and |
Patan RIC (excluding P.Cs. 95 to 98) in Durg tahsil. |
79. Gunderdehi-—Bhatagaon and Gunderdehi RICs and P.Cs, 95 to 98 in Patan RIC |
in Durg tahsil. |
30. Khertha—Anda RIC in Burg tahsil and Khertha RIC in Balod tahsil. |
31. Balod—Gurur and Balod RiCs in Balod tahsii asd the forest villages in the area. |
82. Dondi Lohara (ST)—Khusumkasa and Dondi Lohara RICs in Balod tahsii and |
the forest villages in the area.
RAJNANDGAON DISTRICT
83. Chowki (ST}—-Manpur and Mohala RICs and Chowki RIC (excluding P.Cs. 99 to
105) in Rajnandgaon tahsil.
84, Khujji—Chhuria and Khujji RICs and P.Cs. 99 to 105 in Chowki RIC in
Rajnandgaon tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
85. Dongargaon—Dongargaon RIC in Rajnandgaon tahsil and Lal Bahadur Nagar
RIC (excluding P.C. 88) in Khairagarh tahsil and the forest villages in the area.
86. Rajnandgaon—Rajnandgaon RIC in Rajnandgaon tahsil.
87. Dongargarh (SC)—Ghumka RIC in Rajnandgaon tahsil, P.C. 88 in Lat Bahadur
Nagar RIC and Dongargarh RIC and PCs. 52 and 55 to 61 in Pandadah RIC in
Khairagarh tahsil.
88. Khairagarh—Khairagarh and Chhuikhadan RICs, Pandadah RIC (excluding P.Cs.
52 and 55 to 61) and Gandai RIC (excluding P.Cs. 6 and 8 to 14) in Khairagarh
tahsil and the forest villages in the area.

[PAGE 30]
30 . THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (Part —
FI
san meeeneeeeree
Serial No. Name and extent of constituency
EE ECOSUN CY
Gd) (2)
KAWARDHA DISTRICT
89. Birendranagar—PCs. 6 and 8 to 14 in Gandai RIC in Khairagarh tahsil and
Birendranagar and Sahaspur Lohara RICs and Kawardha RIC (excluding P.Cs. 28,
29, 34 and 35 and Kawardha Town) in Kawardha tahsil and the forest villages in
the area.
99, Wawardha—Dasrangpur and Bodla RICs and Kawardha Town and PCs. 28, 29, ;
34 and 35 in Kawardha RIC in Kawardha tahsil and the forest villages im the area.”.

[PAGE 31]
Sec. 1 J} THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31
THE THIRD SCHEDULE :
(Sez section 19) i
AMENDMENT OF THE Constrrurion (SCHEDULED Castes) Orprr, 1950 ;
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,-— :
(a) in paragraph 2, for the figures “XXU”, the figures “KXTI’ shall te :
substituted; :
(5) in the Schedule, after Part XXII, the following shall be inserted, namcly;— :
“PART XX(1L—Cuuartiscarit
1, Audhelia
: 2. Bagri, Bagdi
3. Bahna, Bahana -
4, Balehi, Balai
5. Banchada
6. Barahar, Basod
7, Bargunda
8. Basor, Burud, Bansor, Bansodi, Bansphor, Basar
\ 9, Bedia
10. Beldar, Sunkar
11. Bhangi, Mehtar, Balmiki, Lalbegi, Dharkar :
12. Bhanumati :
13. Chadar
14. Chamar, Chamari, Bairwa, Bhambhi, Jatav, Mochi, Regar, Nona, Robidas, .
Ramnami, Satnami, Serjyabanshi, Surjyaramnami, Ahirwar, Chamar, Mangan.
Raidas
15, Chidar
16. Chikwa, Chikvi
17. Chitar :
18. Dahait, Dahayat, Dahat
19, Dewar
20, Dinanuk .
21, Dhed, Dher .
22. Dohor
23, Dom, Dumar, Dome, Domar, Deris
24, Ganda, Gandi
25. Ghasi, Ghasia
26. Holiya
27. Kanjar ;
28. Katia, Patharia .
29. Khatik
30. Koli, Kori
: 31. Khangar, Kanera, Mirdha
32. Kuchbandhia
33. Mahar, Mehra, Meher
34. Mang, Mang Garodi, Mang Garedi, Dankhani Mang, Mang Mahasi, Madezi,
Garudi, Radhe Mang
35. Meghwal
36. Moghia
37, Muskhan
38. Nat, Kalbelia, Sapera, Navdigar, Kubutar
39. Pasi
40. Rujjhar
41. Sansi, Sansia
42, Silawat :
43, Zamral.”. :

[PAGE 32]
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
(See section 20)
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950
In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,—
. (a) in paragraph 2, for the figures “XIX”, the figures “XX” shall be substituted;
(b) in the Schedule,
(é) for Part VIII, the following Part shall be substituted, namely:—
“PART VIII.—Mabnya Prabesy
1, Agariya :
2. Andh
3. Baiga
4, Bhaina
5. Bharia Bhumia, Bhuinhar Bhumia, Bhumiya, Bharia, Paliha, Pando
6. Bhattra
7. Bhil, Bhilala, Barela, Patelia
8. Bhil Mina .
9. Bhunjia
10. Biar, Biyar :
11. Binjhwar
12. Birhul, Birhor
13. Damor, Damaria
14. Dhanwar
15. Gadaba, Gadba
16. Gond, Arakh, Arrakh, Agaria, Asur, Badi Maria, Bada Maria, Bhatola, Bhimma,
Bhuta, Koilabhuta, Koliabhuti, Bhar, Bisonhorn Maria, Chota Maria, Dandami
Maria, Dauru, Dhurwa, Dhoba, Dhulia, Dorla, Gaiki, Gatta, Gatti, Gaita, Gond,
Gowari, Hill Maria, Kandra, Kaianga, Khatola, Koitar, Koya, Khirwar, Khirwara,
Kucha Maria, Kuchki Maria, Madia, Maria, Mana, Mannewar, Meghya, Mogia,
Monghya, Mudia, Muria, Nagarchi, Nagwanshi, Ojha, Raj Gond, Sonjhari,
Jnareka, Thatia, Thotya, Wade Maria, Vade Maria, Darot
17. Halba, Hatbi :
18. Kamar
19. Karku ;
20. Kawar, Kanwar, Kaur, Cherwa, Rathia, Tanwar, Chattri
21. Keer (in Bhopal, Raisen and Sehore districts)
22. Khairwar, Kondar
23. Kharia
24. Kondh, Khond, Khand
25. Kol
26 Kolam
27. Korku, Bopchi, Mouasi, Nihar, Nahul, Bhodhi, Bondeya
28. Korwa, Kodaku
29. Majhi :
30. Majhwar
31. Mawasi
32. Mina (in Sironj Sub-Division of Vidisha District)
33, Munda
34, Nages:a, Nagasia
35. Oraon. Dhanka, Dhangad
36. Panike {in (i) Chhatarpur, Panna, Rewa, Satna, Shahdol, Umaria, Sidhi and
Tikamgarh districts, and (ii) Sevda and Datia tehsils of Datia district)]
37. Pao .

[PAGE 33]
Sec. 1 J THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33
eee I
38. Pardhan, Pathari, Saroti
39. Pardhi (in Bhopal, Raisen and Sehore districts) :
40. Pardhi, Bahelia, Bahetlia, Chita Pardhi, Langoli Pardhi, Phans Pardhi, Shikari,
Takankar, Takia [in (i) Chhindwara, Mandla, Dindori.and Seoni districts, :
(ii) Baihar tehsil of Balaghat district, (iii) Betul, Bhainsdehi and Shahpur tahsils
of Betul district, (iv) Patan tahsil and Sihora and Majholi blocks of Jabalpur
district, (v) Katni (Murwara) and Vijaya Raghogarh tahsils and Bahoriband and
Dhemerkheda blocks of Katni district, (vi) Hoshangabad, Babai, Sohagpur,
Pipatiya and Bankhedi tahsils and Kesla block of Hoshangabad district,
(vii) Narsinghpur district, and (viii) Harsud tahsil of Khandwa district]
41, Parja
42. Sahariya, Saharia, Seharia, Sehria, Sosia, Sor :
43, Saonta, Saunta
44, Saur
45, Sawar, Sawara
46, Sonr.”;
(i) after Part XIX, the following shall be added, namely:—
“PART XX.—CHHATTISGARH ;
1, Agariya
' 2. Andh . :
3. Baiga
4. Bhaina
5. Bharia Bhumia, Bhuinhar Bhumia, Bhumiya, Bharia, Paliha, Pando
6. Bhattra
7. Bhil, Bhilala, Barela, Patelia |
8. Bhil Mina |
9. Bhunjia |
10. Biar, Biyar |
11. Binjhwar |
12. Birhul, Birhor |
; 13. Damor, Damaria |
14. Dhanwar
15. Gadaba, Gadba
16. Gond, Arakh, Arrakh, Agaria, Asur, Badi Maria, Bada Maria, Bhatola, Bhimma, ;
Bhuta, Koilabhuta, Kolibhuti, Bhar, Bisonhorn Maria, Chota Maria, Dandami
Maria, Dhuru, Dhurwa, Dhoba, Dhulia, Dorla, Gaiki, Gatta, Gatti, Gaita, Gond,
Gowari Hill Maria, Kandra, Kalanga, Khatola, Koitar, Koya, Khirwar, Khirwara,
Kucha Marta, Kuchaki Maria, Madia, Maria, Mana, Mannewar, Moghya, Mogia,
. Monghya, Mudia, Muria, Nagarchi, Nagwanshi, Ojha, Raj Gond, Sonjhari,
Shareka, Thatia, Thotya, Wade Maria, Vade Maria, Daroi
17. Halba, Halbi :
18. Kamar
19, Karku
20. Kawar, Kanwar, Kaur, Cherwa, Rathia, Tanwar, Chattri
21, Khairwar, Kondar . .
22. Kharia _
23. Kondh, Khond, Kandh
24. Kol
25. Kolam .
26. Korku, Bopchi, Mouasi, Nihar, Nahul, Bondhi, Bondeya
7 27. Korwa, Kodaku ;
28. Majhi
29. Majhwar
30. Mawasi

[PAGE 34]
34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (Parr H— .

31, Munda

32. Nagesia, Nagasia

‘33. Oraon, Dhanka, Dhangad

34, Pao

35. Pardhan, Pathari, Saroti

36. Pardhi, Bahelia, Bahellia, Chita Pardhi, Langoli Pardhi, Phans Pardhi, Shikan,
Takankar, Takia {in (i) Bastar, Dantewara, Kanker, Raigarh, Jashpurnagar, Surguja
and Koria district, (ii) Katghora, Pali, Kartala and Korba tahsils of Korba district,
(iii) Bilaspur, Pendra, Kota and Takhatpur tahsils of Bilaspur district, (iv) Durg,
Patan, Gunderdehi, Dhamdha, Balod, Gurur and Dondilohara tahsils of Durg
district, (v) Chowki, Manpur and Mohaia Revenue Inspector Circles of
Rajnandgon district, (vi) Mahasamund, Saraipali‘and Basna tahsils of
Mahasamand district, (vii) Bindra-Navagarh Rajim and Deobhog tahsils of
Raipur district, and (viii) Dhamtari, Kurud and Sihava tahsils of Dhamtari
district]

37, Parja

38. Sahariya, Saharia, Seharia, Sehria, Sosia, Sor

~ 39, Saonta, Saunta

40. Saur ,

41. Sawar, Sawara

42. Sonr.”.

[PAGE 35]
,
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE 7
(See section 42) |
1, Famine Relief Fund |
2. Guarantee Reserve Fund Investment Account |
3. Revenue Reserve Fund Investment Account |
4. State Agriculture Credit (Relief and Guarantee) Fund
5. Cash Balance Investment Account
6. Land Revenue and Stamp Fund
7. Rural Development Fund
8. Energy Development Cess Fund :
9. Compensatory Afforestation Fund
10. Forest Development Cess Fund
11. Road Safety Fund
, 12. Depreciation/Renewal Reserve Fund
13. Madhya Pradesh Calamity Relief Fund ;
‘ 14. World Food Programme Project Fund :
15. Madhya Pradesh State Employees’ Family Benefit Fund ;
16. School Building Fund
17. Pensioners' Welfare Fund
18. Crop Insurance Fund. .

[PAGE 36]
, .
36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Part H—
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
(See section 49)
APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS

: 1, Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the successor State

shall in respect to pensions granted before the appointed day by the existing State of Madhya

Pradesh, pay the pensions drawn in its treasuries.

2. Subject to the adjustments, the liability in respect of pensions of officers serving
in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh whe retire or proceed
on leave preparatory to retirement before the appointed day, but whose claims for pensions
are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the liability of the State of Madhya
Pradesh. .

3. There shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the appointed .
day and ending on the 31st day of March of that financial year and in respect of each

. subsequent financial year, the total payment made in all the successor States in respect of
pension referred to in paragraphs I and 2. The total representing the liability of the
existing State of Madhya Pradesh in respect of pension shall be apportioned between the
successor State on the population ratio and any successor State paying more than its due
share shall be reimbursed the excess amount by the successor State or State paying less.

4. The lability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh in respect of pension granted ,
before the appointed day and drawn in any area outside the territories of the existing State
shall be the liability of the State of Madhya Pradesh subject to adjustments to be made in
accordance with paragraph 3 as if such pensions had been drawn in any treasury in the - mo
State of Madhya Pradesh under paragraph 1.

5. (1) The liability in respect of the pensions of any officer serving immediately
before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Madhya
Pradesh and retiring on or after that day, shall be that of the successor State granting him
the pension, but the portion of the pension attributable to the service of any such officer
before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Madhya
Pradesh shall be allocated between the successor State in the population ratio, and the
Government granting the pension shall be entitled to receive from each of the successor
State its share or this liability.

(2) If any such officer was serving after the appointed day in connection with the
affairs of more than one successor State, the State Government other than the one granting
the pension shall reimburse to the Government by which pension is granted an amount
which bears to the portion of the pension attributable to his service after the appointed day
the same ratio as the period of his qualifying service after the appointed day under the
reimbursing State bears to total qualifying service of such officer after the appointed day
teckoned for the purposes of pension.

6. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension shall be construed as including a
reference value of the pension.

[PAGE 37]
:
° Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37
vec
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE |
(See section 60) |
List oF GOVERNMENT COMPANIES |
1. Madhya Pradesh State Industries Corporation Limited Bhopal |
2. Madhya Pradesh Laghu Udhyog Nigam Limited Bhopal |
3. Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Limited Bhopal |
4. Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation Limited Bhopal
5. Madhya Pradesh State Agro Industries Development Corporation Limited Bhopal |
6. Madhya Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited Bhopal a
7, Madhya Pradesh State Textile Corporation Limited Bhopal |
8. Madhya Pradesh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Limited Bhopal |
. 9. Madhya Pradesh State Tourism Development Corporation Limited Bhopal .
10. Madhya Pradesh Police Housing Corporation Limited , Bhopal ; |
Il. Madhya Pradesh Leather Development Corporation Limited Bhopal ,
12, Madhya Pradesh Hastshilp Avam Hathkargha Vikas Nigam Limited Bhopal
13. Madhya Pradesh Urja Vikas Nigam Limited : Bhopal Do
14. Madhya Pradesh State Electronics Development Corporation Limited - Bhopal |
15. Madhya Pradesh Pichhra Varg Tatha Alpsankhyak Vitta Avam Vikas Nigam Bhopal |
16. Madhya Pradesh Adivasi Vitta Avam Vikas Nigam , Bhopal
17. Madhya Pradesh Export Corporation Limited Bhopal |
18. The Provident Investment Company Limited Mumbai |
19. Madhya Pradesh Film Development Corporation Limited : Bhopal |
20. Optel Telecommunications Limited Bhopal |
21. Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Bhopal) Limited Bhopal |
22. Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Indore) Limited Indore |
23. Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Raipur) Limited Raipur ~ |
24, Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Jabalpur) Limited Jabalpur
25. Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Gwalior) Limited Gwalior
26. Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Rewa) Limited Rewa
27. Madhya Pradesh Agro Pesticides Limited Bhopal
28. Madhya Pradesh Agro Oils and Cattlefeed Limited Bhopal.

[PAGE 38]
+
38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr lI— ,
SSS Eee Par
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE
(See section 66)
CONTINUANCE OF FACILITIES IN CERTAIN STATE INSTITUTION
List oF TRAINING INSTITUTIONS/CENTRES
1. Prevention of Food Adulteration Organisation State Laboratory Controller, Lal Ghati,
Bhopal.
2. State Institute of Health Management and Communication, Gwalior.
3. Madhya Pradesh State Seed Certification Agency, Officer Complex, B-2, Gautam
Nagar, Bhopal.
4. Madhya Pradesh State Forest Research Institute, Polipathar, Narmada Road, Jabalpur.
. 5. Pandit Kunjilal Dubey Rastriya Sansadiya Vidyapeeth, Old Vidhan Sabha Campus,
Bhopal,
6. Mahatma Gandhi State Institute of Rural Development and Training, Adhartal,
Jabalpur.
7. Madhya Pradesh State Employment and Training Institute, Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan,
ShyamlJa Hills, Bhopal.
8. State Academy of Administration, Hitkarni Nagar, 1100 Quarters, Bhopal.
9. Medico Legal Institute, Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal. . :
; 10. Ranger Training College, Balaghat. :
11. Agriculture Cooperative Staff Training Institute of Apex Bank, Kotra Sultanabad,
~- Bhopal. .
12, Jawaharlal Nehru Police Academy, Sagar.
13, Tribal Research and Training Institute, Shyamla Hills, Bhopal.
14. Jail Training Centre, Sagar, 7
15. Armed Police College, Indore.
16. Police Radio Training School, Indore.
17. Central Training Institute, Home Guards and Civil Defence, Khamria, Jabalpur.
18. Forensic Scieace Laboratory, Sagar. :
© 19, Madhya Pradesh Water and Land Management Institute, Walmi Hills, Near Kaliasot
Dam, Kolar Road, Bhopal.
20. Judicial Officers Training Institute, High Court Campus, Jabalpur.
21. Sanjay GandhiYouth Leadership and Reral Development Training Institute, Pachmari,
District Hoshangabad.
22. State Level Training Institute, Mahaigaon, Gwalior. .
. 23. Artificial Insemination Training Institute, Bhopal/Mandla. —
24. Assistant Veterinary Field Officers Training Centre, Mahasamund, Shivpuri.
25. Pouliry Training Centre, Rewa.
26. Food Analysis Unit, Bhopal, ;
27. Fisheries Training Institute, Raipur and Naogaon.
28. Central Semen Station, Bhopal. :
29. Poultry Research Centre, Bhopal
30. Soil Conservation Training Centre, Gwalior and Berul.
31, Plant Protection Training Centre, Obeduilaganj (Raisen),
32, Officers Training Centre Horticulture, Pachmarhi,
33. Sister Tutor Training Institute, Ujjain.
34, Central Research Laboratory Cente, Shyamla Hilis, Bhopal.

[PAGE 39]
> Sec. | } THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39
Se ea IP
ee —k——L_”»:

35. Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, Bhopal.

, 36. Pre-Examination Training Centre for Backward Classes, Bhopal. :

37. State Institute of Education Management and Training, Bhopal.

38. All India Services Pre-Examination Training Centre, Ravishankar University
Campus, Raipur.

39. Excise Training Institute, Birlanagar.

40. Aviation Workshop, State Hangar, Bhopal.
: SUBHASH C. JAIN,

Secy. to the Govt. of India.
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS (PLU), MINTO ROAD, NEW DELH!
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2000.
MGiP(PLUJMRND—3022G!—26.08.2000.