[PAGE 1]
i . .
: &
rest We Sorrt-33004 / 2000 ; “REGISTERED. NO. DL-33004/2000
| The Gazette of. Gudia.
aE
‘ EXTRAORDINARY
' : PART II. — Section 1 - :
sifirere 8 weitere
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
gE
We 37] ay facet, WRAR, sr 25, 2000 / We 3, 1922
No. 37] NEW DELHI, F RIDAY, AUGUST 25, 2000 / BHADRA 3, 1922
we wi # fia Ts wen 3 wnt ¢ fared fee ae orem dae S wy F tar a ae
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
ree
_ MINISTRY OF LAW, JUSTICE AND COMPANY AFFAIRS
(Legislative Department)
, New Delhi, the 25th August, 2000/Bhadra “3, 1922 (Saka)
. ay __ The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 25th August,
Cc 2000, and is hereby published for general information:-— .
\f? THE UTTAR PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2000
‘ (No. 29 or 2000) ce - ;
. : [25th August, 2000.]
‘ An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh
and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:-—
. 3) PARTI
PRELIMINARY .
1. This Aci may be called the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Short title.
(a) “appointed day" means the day which the Central Government may, by Definitions.
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint;
(6) "article" means an article of the Constitution;
; (c) “assembly constituency", "council constituency" and "parliamentary
. constituency" have the same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act,
. . 1950;
43 of 1950. .

[PAGE 2]
, |
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (Parr li— =) +
Sa nn EARN Pare } |
— . |
(@) "Election Commission” means the Election Commission. appointed by the - |
President under article 324; ;
(2) "existing State of Uttar Pradesh" means the State of Uttar Pradesh as existing
immediately before the appointed day;
(/ "law" includes any-enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law, rule,
scheme, notification or other instrument having, immediately before the appointed
day, the force of law in the whole or in any part of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh;
(g) "notified order" means an order published in the-Official Gazette;
(h) "population ratio”, in relation to the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal,
. means the ratio of [321:70;
(/) "sitting member”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature ,
of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh, means a person who immediately before the
appointed day, isa member of that House; ’ .
. Y) ‘Sucwessir Siute’, ii relation to the existing State of Uttar Pradesh, means the :
State of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal; : .
. (k) “transferred territory" means the territory which on the appointed day is
transferred from the existing State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Uttaranchal;
() “treasury” includes a sub-treasury; and on
(m) any reference to a district, tehsil or other territorial division of the existing
State of Uttar Pradesh shall be construed as a reference to the area comprised within
that territorial division on the appointed day.
, ' PARTI
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
Formation of 3, On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new. State to be known as
Uttaranchal the State of Uttaranchal comprising the following territories of the existing State of Uttar 431
State, Pradesh, namely: : . .
Pauri Garhwal, Teliri Garhwal, Uttar Kashi, Chamoli, Dehradun, Nainital,
Almora, Pithoragarh, Udham Singh Nagar, Bageshwar,.Champawat, Rudraprayag
and Hardwar districts, . :
and thereupon the said territories shail cease to form part of the- existing State of Uttar :
Pradesh. :
State of Uttar 4. On and from the appointed day, the State of Uttar Pradesh shall comprise the
Pradesh and territories of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh other than those specified in section 3.
territorial
divisions
thereof. ° .
Amendment of 5. On and from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Constitution, under the
the First heading "I. THE STATES",—
Schedule to
a stuti (a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Uttar Pradesh, after
onstitution. the words, brackets and figures “clause (a) of sub-section (/) of section 3 ofthe Bihar 43
and Uttar Pradesh (Alteration of Boundaries) Act, 1968", the following shall be 24 of 1968.
inserted, namely:— a
“and the territories specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation
Act, 2000";

[PAGE 3]
TN & Sec. 1j THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
(0) after entry 26, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:-— , ‘
; "27. Uttaranchal: The territories specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh :
Reorganisation Act, 2000.".

6. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be deemed to affect the power Saving powers
of the Government of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal to alter, after the appointed day, the of State
name, area or boundaries of any district or other territorial division in the State, Governments

PART Ill
; . "REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
The Council of States .
7. On and from the appointed day, in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, im the Amendment of
Table,— the Fourth
: Schedute to
(a) entries 17 to 28 shall be renumbered as entries 18 to 29 respectively; the
j . Constitution.
. (5) in entry 16, for the figures "34", the figures "31" shall be substituted;
; (c) after entry 16, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
. ‘V7, Uttaranchal oo... eecceesssssssescsssssseeessssseursearenesssserserssiassseressseeeecS!
. 8. (/) On and from the appointed day, thirty-four sitting members of the Council of Allocationof
States representing the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall be deemed to have been elected _ sitting
to fill the seats allotted to the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, as specified in the embers.
First Schedule to this Act.
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered, :
The House of the People
. 9. On and from the appointed day, there shall be allocated 80 seats to the successor Representation
. State of Uttar Pradesh, and 5 to the successor State of Uttaranchal, in the House of the _ in the House
43 of 1950. People, and the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed °F the People.
to be amended accordingly.
: 10. On and from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly _ Delimitation
Constituencies Order, 1976, shall stand amendedas directed in the Second Schedule to this of |
Parliamentary
Act. and Assembly
Constituencies
If. (7) Every sitting member of the House of the People representing a constituency Provision as to
which, on the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 10, stands allotted, with _ sitting
or without alteration of boundaries, to the successor State of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal, ™embers.
shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency as so
allotted.
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered,
The Legislative Assembly
. 12. (/) The number of seats as on the appointed day in the Legislative Assemblies of Provisionsas
the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal shall be four hundred and three and seventy re eeistative
« eS.
respectively, : : : semble
43 of 1950. (2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, under
heading “I. States’— ; .
(a) entries 25 and 26 shall be renumbered as entries 26 and 27 respectively;
(6) after entry 24, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
25, Uttaranchal... ese ceensaniiinenatenssren 205

[PAGE 4]
4 THEGAZETTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY Pant tH), 4
(c) in entry 26 as so renumbered, for the figures "425", the figures "403" shall
- be substituted.
Allocation of 13. (/) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of
__ sitting Uttar Pradesh elected to fill a seat in that Assembly from a constituency which on the appointed .
members, day by virtue of the provisions of section 10 stands allotted, with or without alteration of
: boundaries, to the State of Uttaranchal shall, on and from that day, cease to be a member of :
the Legislative Assembly of Uttar Pradesh and shall be deemed to have been elected to fill 43
a seat in the provisional Legislative Assembly of Uttaranchal from that constituency as so : ‘
allotted. ; ;
(2) All other sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Uttar
Pradesh shal! continue to be members of the Legislative Assembly of that State and any such
sitting member representing a constituency the extent or the name and extent of which are
altered by virtue of the provisions of section 10 shall be deemed to have been elected to the
Legislative Assembly of Uttar Pradesh by that constituency as so altered.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
- , the Legislative Assemblies of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal shal! be deemed to be duly
constituted on the appointed day. :
(4) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Uttar :
Pradesh nominated to that Assembly under article 333 to represent the Anglo-Indian i
community shall be deemed to have been nominated to represent the said community in the :
Legislative Assembly of Uttar Pradesh under that article. ‘ poe
Composition 14. (/) On and from the appointed day and until the Legislative Assembly of the :
py browisional successor State of Uttaranchal has been duly constituted and summoned to meet for the first
Assembly of session under the provisions of the Constitution, a provisional Legislative Assembly of ;
Uttaranchal. the State of Uttaranchal, consisting-of the twenty-two sitting members of the Legislative ;
Assembly and nine members of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh
representing the Assembly constituencies or Council constituencies of the territories
transferred by virtue of the provisions of section 3 shall be constituted.
(2) The provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttaranchal shall exercise all ‘
the powers and perform all the duties conferred by the provisions of the Constitution on the :
Legislative Assembly of that State. ; - :
(3) The term of office of the members of the provisionat Legislative Assembly of the
State of Uttaranchal shall, unless the said Legislative Assembly is sooner dissolved, expire
immediately before the first meeting of the Legislative Assembly ofthe State of Uttaranchal.
Duration of 15. The period of five years referred to in clause (1) of article 172 shall, in the case of
peices the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttar Pradesh, be deemed to have commenced on
“ the date on which it actually commenced in the case of the’ Legislative Assembly of the
. existing State of Uttar Pradesh.
Speaker and 16. (/) The persons who immediately before the appointed day are the Speaker and
Deputy Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall
Speaker. continue to be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of that Assembly on and from
that day.
‘ (2) As soon’‘as may be after the appointed day, the provisional Legislative Assembly
of the successor State of Uttaranchal! shall choose two members of that Assembly to be
respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and until they are so chosen, the duties of
the office of Speaker shall be performed by.such member of the Assembly as the Governor
may appoint for the purpose. ; -
Rules of 17. The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative Assembly of
procedure. Uttar Pradesh as in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until rules are made :
. under clause (1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of the

[PAGE 5]
> 1 & . Src. 1 ] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 oe
B SN
a ed
Legislative Assembly of Uttaranchal, subject to such modifications and adaptations as
may be made therein by the Speaker thereof. ; :
. ; The Legislative Council of Uttar Pradesh
| 18. On and from the appointed day, there shal! be ninety-nine seats in the Legislative Legistative
- Council of Uttar Pradesh, and in the Third Schedule to the Representation of the People Council of
430f1950. Act, 1950, for the existing entry 8, the following entry shall be substituted, namely:— Uta" Pradesh
"8. Uttar Pradesh «00.0... eeccssseesessesssere99 36 8 8 37 10".
19. On and from the appointed day, the Delimitation of the Council Constituencies Amendment of ,
(Uttar Pradesh) Order, 1951 shall stand amended as directed in the Third Schedule. the
; : Delimitation
. of Council
; . . Constituencies.
. 20. (7) On and from the appointed day, the sitting members of the Legislative Council Provision as to
of the existing State of Uttar'Pradesh specified in the Fourth Schedule to this Act shall cease certain sitting
to be members of that Council and shall be deemed to be the members of the provisional ™e™bers.
Legislative Assembly. ; ;
(2) On and from the appointed day, all siting members of the Legislative Council of
the existing State of Uttar Pradesh other than those referred to in sub-section (2) shall continue
oo. , to be members of that Council. :
, _ (3) The term of office of the members referred to in sub-section (2) shall remain
unaltered. :
21. The person who immediately before the appointed day is the Deputy Chairman of Deputy
; the Legislative Council of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall continue to be the Deputy Chairman.
Chairman, on and from that day of that Council.
Delimitation of constituencies
22. (1) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of section 12, the Election Delimitation
Commission shall determine in the manner hereinafter provided— : of
; . constituencies.
(a) thenumber of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
; 7 Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal,
respectively, having regard to the relevant provisions of the Constitution;
(6) the assembly constituencies ‘into which-each State referred to in clause (a) :
shall be divided, the extent of each of such constituencies and in which of them seats
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes; and
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of the
. parliamentary constituencies in each State referred to in clause (a) that may be necessary
or- expedient. .
: (2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses (8) and (c) of sub-section (/),the *
. Election Commission shall have regard to the following provisions, namely:—
(a) all the constituencies shail be single-member constituencies;
- (8) all constituencies shall; as far as practicable, be geographically compact :
areas, and in delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features, existing
‘ boundaries of administrative units, facilities of communication and conveniences to
. the public; and :
_ + (c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion
of their population to the total population is the largest.

[PAGE 6]
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr 1
. —K*K_KK{£Z_Oo@eQaQQll:|W t .¢
a jie ”
| (3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the performance : °
of its functions under sub-section (/), associate with itself as associate members, five persons ;
: as the Central Government may by order specify, being persons who are the members of
i the Legislative Assembly of the State or of the House of the People representing the State:
. Provided that none of the associate members shall have aright to vote or to sign any
i decision of the Election Commission. .
: (4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it: .
shall be filled as far as practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3).
(5) The Election Commission shall— .
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together with the
dissenting proposals. if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof
in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit,
together with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals
and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be further considered by it; ;
mol (5) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it i 25
before the date so specified; and : : :
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received : :
by it before the ‘date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of i
Constituencies and cause such order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; ; 7
and upon such publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shal! i
not be called in question in any court. : >
(6) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to assembly constituencies shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the concerned State. :
Power of 23. a ) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Official :
Election Gazette, — :
Commission to :
pantain (a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 22 or any :
Orders up.to- error arising therein from inadvertent slip or omission; and ; . r
dare. (b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any ;
such order or orders is or are altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be :
necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-date. * ;
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the concerned Legislative Assembly.
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Amendment of 24, On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,
the Scheduled shal] stand amended as directed in the Fifth Schedule to this Act.
Castes Order. ~
Amendment of 25. On and from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,
the Scheduled shall stand amended as directed in the Sixth Schedule to this Act.
Tribes Order, .
. PARTIV
Hicu Court . :
High Court of 26. (7) As from the appointed day, there shall be a separate High Court for the State of :
Uttaranchal Uttaranchal (hereinafter referred to as “the High Court of Uttaranchal") and the High Court /
of Judicature at Allahabad shall become the High Court for the State of Uttar Pradesh :
(hereinafter referred to as the High Court at Allahabad). :
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Uttaranchal shall be at such place as the
President may, by notified order, appoint. , :

[PAGE 7]
i. Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA. EXTRAORDINARY 7
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Judges and division
‘ courts of the High Court of Uttaranchal may sit at such other place or places in the State
of Uttaranchal other than its principal seat as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of
the Governor of Uttaranchal, appoint, _
. 27. (7) Such of the Judges of the High Court at Allahabad holding office immediately Judges of
before the appointed day as may be determined by the President shall on that day cease to be Uttaranchal
Judges of the High Court at Allahabad and become, Judges of the High Court of Uttaranchal. High Cour.
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub-section (7) become Judges of the High Court .
of Uttaranchal shall, except in the case where any such person is appointed to be the Chief
. Justice of that High Court, rank in that Court according to the priority of their respective
appointments as Judges of the High Court at Allahabad,
F _28. The High Court of Uttaranchal shall have, in respect of any part of the territories Jurisdiction of
included in the State of Uttaranchal, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under the Uttaranchal
_ law in force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of that part of High Court
the said territories by the High Court at Allahabad.
j 25 of 961. 29. (/) On and from the appointed day, in the Advocates Act, 1961, in section 3, in Special
sub-section (/), in clause (a), for the words “and Uttar Pradesh”, the words “Uttar Pradesh Provision
; and Uttaranchal” shall be substituted. - ; “relating to Bar
. Councit and-
(2) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate on the rol] 24vacates.
of the Bar Council of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh may give his option in writing,
within one year from the appointed day to the Bar Council of such existing State, to transfer
. his name on the roll of the Bar Council of Uttaranchal and notwithstanding anything contained
25 of 1961. inthe Advocates Act, 1961 and the rules made thereutider, on such option so given his name
4 shall be deemed to have been transferred on the roll of the Bar Council of Uttaranchal with
effect from the date of the option so given for the purposes of the said Act and the rules
made thereunder. ; ;
(3) The persons other than the advocates who are entitled immediately before the
appointed day, to practise in the High Court.at Allahabad or any subordinate court thereof
shall, on and after the appointed day, be recognised as such persons entitled also to practise
| _ inthe High Court of Uttaranchal or any subordinate court thereof, as the case may be.
(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Uttaranchal shall be regulated in
| accordance with the like principles as immediately before the appointed day are in force
with respect to the right of audience in the High Court at Allahabad.
30. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately before the Practice and
appointed day with respe¢t to practice and procedure in the High Court at Allahabad shall, Procedure in
. . + + . : Uttaranchal
with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Uttaranchal, and High Court.
accordingly, the High Court of Uttaranchal shall have all such powers to make rules and
orders with respect to practice.and procedure as are immediately before the appointed day
exercisable by the High Court at Allahabad: :
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately before the appointed
day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Courtat Allahabad shall, until varied
or revoked by rules or orders made by the High Court of Uttaranchal, apply with the necessary
modifications in relation to practice and procedure in the High Court of Uttaranchal as if
. made by that Court,
4 31. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respectto the custody Custody of :
of the seal of the High Court at Allahabad shall, with the hecessary modifications, apply seal of
with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Uttaranchal. Hh Cont
32. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the form of Form of writs
writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court at Allahabad shall, and other
with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs andother processes Pf°0*sses-
. used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Uttaranchal.

[PAGE 8]
I, 8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Parr It— a
! Powers of 33. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to the powers of ;
Judges. the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court at Allahabad and _ i
with respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary :
. modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Uttaranchal. .
Procedure as 34. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relating to appeals to the ,
meee, {o Supreme Court from the High Court at Allahabad and the Judges and division courts thereof
Court. shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Uttaranchal.
‘Transfer of - 35. (/) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Allahabad shall, as from the oo
proceedings appointed day, have no jurisdiction in respect of the transferred territory.
: Allahabad (2) Such proceedings pending in the High Courtat Allahabad immediately before the .
i en count ‘0 appointed day as are certified, whether before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that : :
High Court, High Court, having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other \
: . circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and decided by the High Court of
: ’ Uttaranchal shall,assoon as may be after such certification, be transferred to the High Court E
of Uttaranchal. ; . :
ve (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (/) and (2) of this section or :
2 in section 28, but save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Allahabad shall have, and :
: , the High Court of Uttaranchal shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of i
appeals, applications for leave to the Supreme Court, applications. for review and other :
proceedings where any such proceedings seek any relief in respéct of any order passed by :
the High Court at Allahabad before the appointed day: : : Poo.
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Courtat : ,
Allahabad, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred :
to the High Court of Uttaranchal, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such : :
proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.
(4) Any order made by the High Court at Allahabad— . :
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceedings transferred to the High Court
of Uttaranchal by virtue of sub-section (2), or . :
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Allahabad retains DS
; jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section (3), ; :
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High Court at Allahabad, but :
also as an order made by the High Court of Uttaranchal. : . :
Right to 36. Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to.
appear orte —_—_practise-or any other persons entitled to practise-in the High Court at Allahabad and was
procee dings authorised to appear in any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High Court
trans ferred to of Uttaranchal under section 35, shall have the right to appear in the High Court of Uttaranchal
Uttaranchal in relation to those proceedings. : ’
High Court. -
Inierpretation. 37, For the purposes of section 35— : ; .
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has
disposed of all issues between the parties, including any issues with respect to the
taxation of the costs of the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for
-. leave to appeal fo the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision :
and petitions for writs; and _ :
. (®) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a
u Judge or division court thereof, and references to an order made by a court or a :
Judge shall be construed as including references to a sentence, judgment or decree ‘ .
passed or made by that court or Judge. . , aa

[PAGE 9]
> o- * Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
° “ 38. Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Uttaranchal Savings.
F of any provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision
; that may be made on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any
F Legislature or other authority having power to make’such provision.
. PARTV
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES
39, The Governor of Uttar Pradesh may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise Authorisation
such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Uttaranchal as he deems of expenditure
; necessary for any period not more than six months beginning with the appointed day pending of Uttaranchal
the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttaranchal: 5°
Provided that the Governor of Uttaranchal may, after the appointed day, authorise
4 such further expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of
Uttaranchal for any period not extending beyond the said period of six months. ;
; 40. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India referred to in Reports
F clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in relating to
respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each Une ee h
; of the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal who shall cause them to be laid State. mee
before the Legislature of that State, :
: (2) The President may by order— : ‘
a (a) declare any expenditure. incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of Uttar
Pradesh on any service in respect of any periog prior to the appointed day during the
, : financial year or in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted
ae for that service and for that year as disclosed in the reports referred to in sub-section
(1) to have been duly authorised: and
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said
reports. ;
; 41, The President:shall, by order, determine the share of the States of Uttar Pradesh Distribution of
; and Uttaranchal in its total amount payable to the existing State of Uttar Pradesh on the ."evenue.
: recommendation of the Finance Commission constituted under article 280 in such manner :
E . as he thinks fit.
’ PARTVI
. ‘ APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
] 42. (7) The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment of the Application of
assets and liabilities of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh immediately before the appointed Part.
day.
(2) The successor States shall be entitled to receive benefits arising out of the decisions
taken by the predecessor State and the successor States shall be liable to bear the financial
1 liabilities arising out of the decisions taken by the existing State of Uttar Pradesh.
; (3) The apportionment of assets and liabilities would be subject to such financial
adjustment as may be necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable apportionment of
the assets and liabilities amongst the successor States.
(4) Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall be settled :
: through mutual agreeinent, failing which by order by the Central Government on the
advice of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India’
43. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all Stores, articles and Land and
: other goods belonging to. the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall,— goods.
. (a) if within the transferred territory, pass to the State of Uttaranchal; or

[PAGE 10]
| 4
10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRA@RDINARY [Parr, II—
i (b) in any other case, remain the property of the State of Uttar Pradesh: 7
| Provided that where the Central Government is of opinion that any goods or class of :
| goods should be distributed among the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, otherwise
than according to the situation of the goods, the Central Government may issue such directions
i as it thinks fit for a just and equitable distribution of the goods and the goods shall pass to the
successor States accordingly:
- Provided further that in case of any dispute relating to the distribution of any goods or :
class of goods under this sub-section, the Central Government shall endeavour to settle such
dispute through mutual agreement arrived at between the Governments of the successor :
: States fer that purpose, failing which the Central Government may, on request by any of the
j Governments of the successor States, after consu ting both the Governments of the successor .
| States, issue such direction as it may deem fit for the distribution of such goods or class of 7
: | goods, as the case may be, under this sub-section. :
' (2) Stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in particular institutions, :
| | workshops or undertakings or on particular works under consttuction, shall pass to the : :
Successor States in whose territories such institutions, workshops, undertakings or works are . :
__ located, oo, . 3
i . (3) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads of Departments having :
! jurisdiction over the whole of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall be divided between a
| the successor States in accordance with such directions as the Central Government may, i
\ after consultation with the Government of each successor States, think fit to issue for a just |
I and equitable distribution of such stores.
(4) Any other unissued stores of any class in the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall ;
! be divided between the sucéessor States in Proportion to the total stores of that class purchased !
: in the period of three years prior to the appointed day, for the territories of the existing State :
of Uttar Pradesh included respectively in each of the successor States: ;
Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in respect of any class of :
stores or where the value of any class of such stores does not exceed rupees ten thousand, :
: that class ofstores shall be divided between the successor States-according to the population F
ratio. . oo ae i
i (5) In this section, the expression "land" includes immovable property of every kind :
and any rights in or over such property, and the expression "goods" does not include coins, :
bank notes and currency notes. Hy
Treasury and 44, The total of the cash balances in al! treasuries of the State of Uttar Pradesh and the i
bank balances. credit balances of the State with the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India or any
other bank immediately before the appointed day shall be divided between the States of ;
Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal according to the population ratio: ;
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash
balances from.any treasury to any other treasury and the apportionment shall be effected by
adjusting the credit balances of the two States in the books of the Reserve Bank of India on
the appointed day:
Provided further that if the State of Uttaranchal has no account on the appointed day
with the Reserve Bank of India. the adjustment shall be made in such manner as the Central :
Govemment may, by order, direct. :
Artears of 45. The right to recover arrears of the tax or duty on property, including arrears of land :
taxes. revenue, shall belong to the successor State in which the property is situated, and the right im
‘ to recover arrears of any other tax or duty shall belong to the successor State in whose :
tervitories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed day. i
: j
i é

[PAGE 11]
> 4 Sec. 1 ] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY BI
46. (/) The right of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh to recover any loans or advances Right to
‘made before the appointed day to any local body, society; agriculturist or other person in an area tecover loans
within that State shall belong to the successor State in which that area is included on that day, "4 advances.
(2) The right of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh to recover any loans or advances
made before the appointed day to any person or institution outside that State shall belong to
the State of Uttar Pradesh: :
Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan or advance shall be ;
, divided between the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal according to the population ;
ratio. :
47, (1) The securities held in respect of the investments made from Cash Balances Investments
Investment Account or from any Fund iti the Public Account of the existing State of Uttar and credits in
. _ Pradesh as specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be apportioned in the ratio of population °¢™in funds.
: of the successor States: ‘ ,
: Provided that the securities held in investments made from the Calamity Relief Fund
of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall be divided in the ratio of the area of the territories
occupied by the successor States: . ,
Provided further that the balance in the Reserve Funds in the Public Account of Uttar
P Pradesh created wholly out of appropriations from the Consolidated Fund of the existing
State of Uttar Pradesh, to the extent the balances have not been invested outside Government
: account, shall not be carried forward to similar Reserve Funds in the Public Account of the - :
successor States. : . na
(2) The investments of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh immediately before the :
| appointed day in any special fund, the objects of which are confined to a local area, shall
belong to the State in which that area is included on the appointed day.
; (3) The investments of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh immediately before the
appointéd day in any private, commercial or industrial undertaking, in so far as such
] investments have not been made or are deenied not to have been made from the Cash Balances
F Investment Account, shall pass to the State in which the principal seat of business of the
undertaking is located. : .
; . (4) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial
4 Act for the existing State of Uttar Pradesh or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provistons
] of Part Il, become an inter-State body corporate, the investments in, or Joans or advances to,
any such body corporate by the existing State of Uttar Pradesh made before the appointed
; day shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by or under this Act, be divided between the
States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal in the same proportion in which the assets of the
: body corporate are divided under the provisions of this Part. :
; 48. (1) The assets and liabilities relating to any commercial or industrial undertaking Assets and
1 of the State of Uttar Pradesh shall pass to the State in which the undertaking is located. walities of
1 (2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the State of Uttar Pradesh for undertakings.
any such commercial or industrial undertaking, the securities held in tespect of investments
made from that fund shall pass to the State in which the undertaking is located.
49. (/) All liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account of the existing Public Debt.
State of Uttar Pradesh outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall be
apportioned in the ratio of population of the successor States unless a different mode of :
; apportionment is provided under the provisions of this Act. .
(2) The individual items of liabilities to be allocated to the successor States and the
amount of contribution required to be made by one successor State to another shall be
such as may be ordered by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller : ;
and Auditor-General of India:

[PAGE 12]
a

Wi

is -

| io 12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Parr H— 4

yj Provided that till such orders are issued, the liabilities on account of Public Debt :

‘| and Public Account of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall continue to be the liabilities :

! of the Successor State of Uttar Pradesh.

(3) The liability on account of loan raised from any source and re-lent by the existing i

| State of Uttar Pradesh to such entities as may be specified by the Central Government and :

‘| . whose area of operation is confined to either of the successor States shall devolve on the ;

' respective States as specified in sub-section (4),

(4) The public debt of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh attributable to loan taken :
from any source for the express purpose of re-lending the same toa specific institution and :
outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall,—

i (a) if re-lent to any local body, body corporate or other institutioh in any local

| area, be the debt of the State in which the local area is included on the appointed day;

aI or

: () if re-lent to the Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited, the Uttar Pradesh ,

| ! Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited, the Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Limited, :

| the Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation, or the Uttar Pradesh Housing i

( . Board or any other institution which becomes an inter-State institution on the appointed i

~ day, be divided between the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal in the same i

i proportion in which the assets of such body corporate or institution are divided under po

| the provisions of Part VI. : . po

! (5) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained by the existing State of i

ji Uttar Pradesh for repayment of any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect of :

: investments made from that fund shall be divided between the successor States of Uttar i

: Pradesh and Uttaranchal in the same proportion in which the total public debt is divided :
between the two States under this section. :

(6) In this section, the expression “Government security” means a security created ‘

and issued by a State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any of :

the forms specified in, or prescribed under, clause (2) of section 2 of the Public Debt Act, :

; 1944. 18 of 1944. i

: Floating Debt. 50. The liability of the State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of any floating loan to provide 4 ;

short-term finance to any commercial undertaking shall be the liability of the State in whose i
: territories the undertaking is located. 0 i
Refund of 51. The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh to refund any tax or duty on i
‘sxescollecRd property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor :
" . State in whose territories the property is situated, and the tiability of the existing State of :
. : Uttar Pradesh to refund any other tax or duty collected in. excess shall be the liability: of the 5
! successor State in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included. :
Deposits, etc. 52. (1) The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of any civil
. deposit or local fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in
whose area the deposit has been made.
(2) The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of any charitable or
other endowment shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area
: the institution entitled to the benefit of the endowmentis located or of the State to which the
objects of the endowment, under the terms thereof, are confined.
: Provident 53. The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of the provident fund :
: Tund. account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, be F
: the liability of the State to which that Government servant is permanently allotted. :
i Pensions. 54. The liability of the existing State of Utfar Pradesh in respect of pensions shall :
pass to, or be apportioned between, the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal i
i in accordance with the provisions contained in the Eighth Schedule to this Act. i
Contracts. 55. (1) Where, before the appointed day, the existing State of Uttar Pradesh has :
! 5]

[PAGE 13]
( €@a - Seat y THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13
. O iii |
made any contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that
contract shall be deemed to have been made in the exercise of the executive power—. : |
; (a) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from the appointed day, exclusive |
. purposes of either of the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal; and . |
(6) in any other case, of the State of Uttar Pradesh, .
: and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue under any such contract
" shall, to the extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the existing State of
Uttar Pradesh, be rights or iiabilities of the State of Uttaranchal or the State of Uttar Pradesh,
as thé case may be: ;
Provided'that in any such case as is referred to in clause (bj, the initial allocation of
rights and liabilities made by this sub-section shall be subject to such financial adjustment
as may be agreed upon between the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal or in
. default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.
i . (2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be-deemed to be included in the
liabilities which have accrued or may accrue under any contract—_. ;
; (a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal
; in proceedings relating to the contract; and : :
4 oS (®) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with any
: such proceedings.
F (3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to
the apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligation;
4 and bank balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature of
; contractual rights, be dealt with under those provisions.
; 56. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Uttar Pradesh Liability in
is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong other than breach of contract, eee
4 ed actionable
' that liability shall,— wrong,
44 ; (a) ifthe cause of action arose wholly within the territories which, as from that
, day, are the territories of either of the successor States of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal, be a liability of that successor State: and
(6) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Uttar Pradesh, but
4 subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of .
: Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal or, in default of such agreement, as the Central
; ; ' * Government may, by order, direct. :
q 57. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Uttar Pradesh Liability as :
is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co-operative society or other guarantor.
; person, that liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall,—
(a) if the area of operations of such society or persons is limited to the territories
which, as from that day, are the territories of either of the States of Uttar Pradesh or
- Uttaranchal, be a liability of that successor State; and
(6) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Uttar Pradesh, subject.
to such financia! adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Uttar Pradesh
and Uttaranchal or, in default of such agreements, as the Central Government may, by
. : order, direct.
; 58. If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of the Hems in .
4 nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in suspense.
accordance with that provision.
59. The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh Residuary
not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the State of Uttar Pradesh Provision.
; in the first instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between
the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal or, in default of such agreement, as the Central
Government may, by order, direci. .

[PAGE 14]
‘
i
i 14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— yg
Apportionment 60. Where the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal agree that the
fs iebitties by benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned between them i
| agreement. ina manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Part,
| : notwithstanding anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability
i shall be apportioned in the manner agreed upon.
; Power of 61. Where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the successor States :
Cea emt to of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits .
. order or becomes subject to any liability, and the Central Government is of opinion, ona reference
; allocationor | made within a period of three years from the appointed day by either of the States, that it is :
| adjustmentin just and equitable that property or those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the i
certain cases. ther successor State, or that a contribution towards that liability should be made.by the ‘
4 other successor State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner between :
: the two States, or the other State shall make to the State subject to the liability such contribution |
il| in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the two State : |
ly Governments, by order, determine. ‘
i
| Certain: 62. All sums payable either by the State of Uttar Pradesh or by the State of Uttaranchal :
7 berchargedon to the other States or by the Central Government to either of those States, by virtue of the i
us Consolidated | Provisions of this Act, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State by which i |
I Fund, such sums are payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India. : |
PART VIL 4 |
fo PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS ;
| i
: Provisions for 63. (1) The following bodies Corporate constituted for the existing State of Uttar i
Power Pradesh, namely:— :
Corporation
: Limited. etc (a) the Utiar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited, the Uttar Pradesh Jal Vidyut ;
: Nigam Limited and the Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Limited; j
(b) the Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission; and :
a (c) the State Warehousing Corporation established under the Warehousing :
Corporations Act, 1962, : , 58 of 1962. i
; shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which i
they were functioning immediately before that day, subject to the provisions of this section :
: and to such directions as may, from time to time, be issued by the Central Government. :
. (2) Any directions issued by the Central Govemment under sub-section (/) in respect i
of the Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation shall include a direction ;
: that the Act under which the Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation
; was constituted shall, in its application to that Power Corporation, Commission or
: Warehousing Corporation, have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as the
Central Government thinks fit. .
(3) The Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation referred to in :
sub-section (/) shall cease to function as from, and shall be deemed to be dissolved on such :
date ay the Central Government may, by order, appoint; and upon such dissolution, its assets,
i rights and liabilities shall be apportioned between the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and :
Uttaranchal in such manner as may be agreed upon between them within one year of the i
i dissolution of the Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation, as the i
case may be, or if no agreement is reached, in such manner as the Centra] Government may, :
by order, determine: : : :
E Provided that any liabilities of any of the said Power Corporations referred to in clause §
: (a) of sub-section (/) relating to the unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the Power 5
{ Corporation by any public sector coal company shall be provisionally apportioned between j
ir the corresponding Power Corporations constituted respectively in the successor States of 4
Te z

[PAGE 15]
C 10 Sec. 1 ] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4s
; the existing State of Uttar Pradesh’ or after the date appointed for ‘the dissolution of the
Power Corporation under this sub-section in such manner as may be agreed upon between
the Governments of the successor States within one month of such dissolution or if no
agreement is reached, in such manner as the Central Government may by order determine
: subject to reconciliation and finalisation of the liabilities which shall be completed within
‘three months from the date of such’ dissolution by the mutual agreement between the |
successor States or failing such agreement by the direction of the Central Government: |
Provided further that an interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the cash
credit interest shail be paid on outstanding unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the Electricity |
Corporation by the public sector coal company till the liquidation of such dues by the |
3 concerned State Power Corporation canstituted in the successor States on or after the date |
3 : appointed for the dissolution of the Power Corporation under this sub-section, |
j . (4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing
the Government of the State of Uttar Pradesh or, as the case may be, the Government of the
; State of Uttaranchal from constituting, at any time on or after the appointed day, a State
4 . Power Corporation, an Electricity Regulatory Commission or a State Warehousing
4g. Corporation for the State under the provisions of this Act relatingto such Power Corporation,
| Commission or Warehousing Corporation; and if such a Power Corporation, Commission
4 or Warehousing Corporation is so constituted in either of the States before the dissolution of
the Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation referred to in sub-section
()),—
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Govemment enabling the new
Power Corporation, new Commission or the new Warehousing Corporation to take
5 over from the existing Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation
4 all or any of its undertakings, assets, rights and liabilities in that State, and
4 (b) upon the dissolution of the existing Power Corporation, Commission or
q Warehousing Corporation,—
. (i) any assets, rights and liabilities which would otherwise have passed to
j u that State by or under the provisions of sub-section (3) shal] pass to the new Board,
7 new Commission or the new Warehousing Corporation instead of to that State;
962. ; (i) any employee who would otherwise have been transferred to or reemployed by that State under sub-section (3), read with clause (i) of sub-section
(5), shall be transferred to or re-employed by the new Power Corporation, new
i Commission or the new Warehousing Corporation instead of to or by that State,
} (3) As agreement entered into between the successor States under sub-section (3) and
4 an order made by the Central Govemmment under that sub-section or under clause (a) of sub- .
i section (4) may provide for the transfer or re-employment of any employee of the Power
: Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation referred to in sub-section (1),—
; () to or by the successor States, in the case of an agreement under sub-section
(2) or an order made under that sub-section;
(ii) to or by the new Power Corporation, new Commission or the new
Warehousing Corporation constituted under sub-section (4), in the case of an order
' made under clause (a)' of that’ sub-section, .
and, subject to the provisions of section 68, also for the terms and conditions of service
applicable to such employees after such transfer or re-employment. :
64. If it appears to the Central Government that the arrangement in regard to the Continuance
: generation of supply or electric power or the supply of water for any area or in regard to a
the execution of any project for such generation or supply has been or is likely to be inresard {0
. modified to the disadvantage of that area by reason of the fact that it is, by virtue of the “ generation and
‘ ; provisions of Part II, outside the State in which the power stations and other installations supply of .
for the generation and supply of such power, or the catchment area, reservoirs and other «tectric power
works for the supply of water, as the case may be, are located, the Central Government and Supply of
may, after consultation with the Government of each successor States wherever necessary, “°"
give such directions as it deenys proper to the State Government or other authority concerned
; for the maintenance, so. far as practicable, of the previous arrangement.

[PAGE 16]
16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— aK : ‘y
t Provisions as 65. (1) The Uttar Pradesh State Financial Corporation established under the State ‘ ‘
| Naeard State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function 630F 1951.
! Financial in those areas in respect of which it was functioning immediately before that day, subject to i
Corporation, _ the provisions of this section and to such directions as may, from time to time, be issued by !
the Central Government. H
j (2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub-section (7) in respect i
- of the Corporation may include a direction that the said Act, in its application to the :
Corporation, shall have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications asmay be specified :
in the direction. : 59 of
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), the Board :
of Directors of the Corporation may, with the previous approval‘of the Central Government :
and shall, ifso required by the Central Government, convene at any time after the appointed '
day a meeting for the consideration of a scheme for the reconstitution or Teorganisation or i
dissolution, as-the case may be, of the Corporation, including ‘proposals regarding the i
| formation of new Corporations, and the transfer thereto of the assets, rights and liabilities of :
{ the existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at the general meeting by a i
; resolution passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the scheme shall be i
: “submitted to the Central Government for its sanction, i
(4) Ifthe scheme is sanctioned by the Central Govemment either without modifications i
or with modifications which are approved at a general meeting, the Central Goverment }
shall certify the scheme, and upon such certification, the scheme shall, notwithstanding H
anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, be binding on j
the Corporations affected by the scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors thereof. | .
(5) Ifthe scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the Central Govemment may refer H
: the scheme to such Judge of the High Court of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal as may be :
nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice thereof, and the decision of the Judge in regard i .
! to the scheme shall be final and shall be binding on the Corporations affected by the scheme ;
as well as the shareholders and creditors thereof. i
(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing i
the Government of the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal from constituting, at any
: time on or after the appointed day, a State Financial Corporation for that State under the i
State Financial Corporations Act, 1951. 63 of 1951 j .
Provisions as 66. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Part, i
to certain each of the companies specified in the Ninth Schedule to this Act shall, on and from the j
compani’s- appointed day and until otherwise provided for in any law, or in any agreement among the j
successor States, or in any direction issued by the Central Government, continue to function :
in the areas in which it was functioning immediately before that day; and the Central :
Government may from time to time issue such directions in relation to such functioning as it :
may deem fit, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, i
1956, or in any other law, 1 of 1956, 4
o
(2) Any directions issued under sub-section (2) in respect of a company referred to in :
that sub-section, may include directions— i
: (a) regarding the division of the interests and shares of existing State of Uttar i
Pradesh in the Company among the successor States; j
(6) requiring the reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the Company so i.
as to give adequate representation to all the successor States. ; i ;
General 67. (7) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the foregoing provisions of this Part, ;
Provision asto where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for i :
: statulory the existing State of Uttar Pradesh or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of i
Corporations. : . i te
} Part II, become an inter-State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, on and from . i.
j the appointed day, continue to function and operate in those areas in respect of wich it :

[PAGE 17]
go _ - was-functioning and operating immediately before that day, subject to such directions as
£1951. 4 . “-inlay:from. tite to. time be issued by the Central Government, until other provision is made
4 by Jaw. in respect of the said body corporate, ; .
j "* (2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub-section (J) in respect
4: of any such body corporate shail include a direction that any law by which the said body
corporaté is governed shall, in its application to that body corporate, have effect subject to
: : such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the direction.
; _ 68. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act, Temporary
59 of 1988. 1988, a permit granted by the State Transport Authority of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh. Provisions as
or any Regional Transport Authority in that State shall, if such permit was, immediately ofeeain
: ' ‘before the appointed day, valid and effective in ‘any area in the transferred territory, be existing road
4 deenied to continue to be valid and effective in that area after that day subject to the provisions: transport
; of that Act’as for the time being in force in that area; and it shall not be necessary for any - permits.
such permit to be countersigned by the State Transport Authority of Uttaranchal or any.
Regional Transport Authority therein for. the purpose of validating it for use in such area:
~- Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the successor State
j Governnient or Governments concertiéd add to amend or vary the conditions attached to
: the permit by the Authority by which the permit was granted. oe
(2).No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in any of the successor
: . States under any such permit, if such vehicle was, immediately before that day, exempt from
j the payment ofany such toll, entrance fees or other charges for its operations in the transferred ;
q territory: : |
i Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State
; Government or Governments concerned, authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance fees
: . or other charges, as the case may be: .
Provided further that the provisions of this sub-section shall not be applicable where
E any such tolls, entrance fees or other-charges of a like nature is Jeviable for the use of any
F road or bridge which is constructed or developed for.commercial purpose by the State
4 . Government, an undertaking of the State Government, a joint undertaking in which the State
i Government is a shareholder or a private sector. ;
_ 4 SS. Wheie cu accouni of the reorganisation of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh Special
1951. | ° under this Act, any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Provisions
: Act, any co-operative society registered under-any law relating to co-operative societies or i
; any commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is reconstituted or reorganised in any compensation
; manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other body corporate, co-operative society - in certain
or undertaking, or ts dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitution, reorganisation, °5°-
: amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such body corporate or in any such
j co-operative society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re-employed by, any other body
: corporate, or in any other co-operative society or undertaking, then, notwithstanding anything
6 | contained in section 25F or section 25FF or section 25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act,
§ 14 0f 1947. 1947, such transfer or re-employment shal] not entitle him to any compensation under that
] : section:
Provided that— . ’
a (a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such
transfer or re-employment are not Jess favourable to the workman than those applicable
1 . to him immediately before the transfer or re-employment; ;
(b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co-operative society or
; the undertaking where the workman transferred or re-employed is, by agreement or
atherwise, legally Hable tc pay to the workman, in the event of his retrenchment,
compensation under section, 25F or section 25FF or section 25FFF of the Industrial
14 of 1947. Disputes Act, 1947 on the basis that his service has been continuous and has not been interrupted by the transfer or re-employment.

[PAGE 18]
q 18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr — : to
Special 70. Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body corporate carrying on business :
i ev eones ‘© are; under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies corporate which after :
3 : the transfer carry on the same business, the losses or profits or gains sustained by the body 2
ii corporate first-mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried :
: forward and set off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Income-tax Act, : :
1961, shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accordance with the 43 of 1961. |
tules to be made by the Central Government in this behalf and, upon such apportionment, E
the share of loss allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance ,
with the provisions of Chapter VI of the said Act, as if the transferee body ‘corporate had j
_ itself sustained such loss ina business carried on by it in the years in which these losses were :
sustained. oe 3
: Continuance 71. (1) The Government of State of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal, as the case may be, i
: offacilities in shall, in respect of the institutions specified in the Tenth Schedule to this Act, located in that ;
L penn 8 rate State, continue to provide facilities to the people of the other State which shall not, in any . ;
i | : respect, be less favourable to such people than what were being provided to them before the . Fy
_ appointed day, for such period and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon :
between the two State Governments before the | st day of December, 2001 or ifno agreement E
: is reached by the said date as may be fixed by order of the Central Government. i
of ; (2) The Central Government may, at any time before the Ist day of December, 2001, i ;
A by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in the Tenth Schedule referred to in sub- . ;
section (/) any other institution existing on the appointed day in the States of Uttar.Pradesh .
; and Uttaranchal and on the issue of such notification, such Schedule shall be deemed to be
, amended by the inclusion of the said institution therein. i
PART VIII ;
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES :
: Provisions 72, (1) In this section, the expression "State cadre"— ;
: relating to All- . . . a . . . . ;
India Services. (a) in rejation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned z
. to it in the Indian Administrative Service (Gadre) Rules, 1954; j
: ; (4) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in :
: 4 the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; and | 3
' . (c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in j
the Indian Forest Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966. 5
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service, Indian Police Service :
and Indian Forest Service for the existing State of Uttar Pradesh, there shall, on and from the 2
i appointed day, be two separate cadres, one for the State of Uttar Pradesh and the other for :
the State of Uttaranchal in respect of each of these services., : .
(3) The initial strength and composition of the State cadres referred to in sub-section :
(2) shail be such as the Central Government may, by order, determine before the appointed. i
day. i
(4) The members of each of the said services borne on the Uttar Pradesh cadre :
thereof immediately before the appointed day shall be allocated to the State cadres of the }
same service constituted under sub-section (2) in such manner and with effect from such i
us date or dates as the Central Government may, by order, specify. i
z
. (5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on or after the ‘
appointed day, of the All-India Services Act, 1951, or the rules made thereunder. 61 of 1951, j
a Provisions 73. (1) Every person who immediately before the appointed day is serving in . a
: relating to connection with the affairs of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall, on and from that ;
iE other services. Gay provisionally continue to serve in connection with "the affairs of the State of Uttar ho,

[PAGE 19]
a” —_ _ Sec, 1} THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
¢. an Pradesh untess.he is required, by general or. special order of the Central Govermment.to .
Sy serve ‘provisionally in connection with the affairs of the State of Uttaranchal: ,
. Provided that every direction under this sub-section issued after the expiry of a ;
; period of one year from the appointed day shall be issued with the consultation of the
1961. Governments of the successor States. :
; (2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by ,
. general or special order, determine the successor State to which every person referred to in
sub-section (/) shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect from which such
allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect.
: (3) Every person who is finally allotted under. the provisions of sub-section (2) toa ;
: successor State shall, ifhe is not already serving therein be made available for serving in the
successor State from such date as may be agreed upon between the Governments concerned
or in default of such agreement, as may be determined by the Central Government.
1 74. (1) Nothing in this section or in section 73 shall be deemed to affect on or after Other
{ the appointed day, the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution Provisions
; in relation to determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection relating to
: with the affairs of the Union or any State: ; : ,
4 Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed
; day in the case of any person deemed to have been allocated to the State of Uttar Pradesh or
; _ to the State of Uttaranchal under section 73 shall.not be varied to his disadvantage except
; with the previous approval of the Central Government. «
4 (2) All services prior to the appointed day rendered by“a person,—
} (a) if he is deemed to have been allocated to any State under section 73, shall be
* deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of that State;
" (6) if he is deemed to have been allocated to the Union in connection with the
§ ~ administration of the Uttaranchal, shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection
- with the affairs of the Union,
. for the purposes of the rules regulating his conditions of service.
. (3) The provisions of section 73, shall not apply in relation to members of any All-
; India Service. :
i= : 75. (1) Every person who, immediately before the appointed day, is holding or Provisions as
; discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs of the existing State ‘0 continuance
of Uttar Pradesh in any area which on that day falls within any of the successor States shal! hse n
. continue to hold the same.post or office in that successor State, and shall be deemed, on and .
j . from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or any
other appropriate authority in that successor State: ; :
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority, .
on and from the appointed day, from passing in relation to such person any order affecting
4 the continuance in such post or office.
76. The Central Government may, by order, establish one or more Advisory Advisory
; Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to— Committees.
(a) the discharge of any of its functions under this Part; and
; (5) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the
£1951. provisions of this Part and the proper consideration of any representations made by
: ] such persons.

[PAGE 20]
"| al a
20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I]— 5
i ee be
fly 2°
| il: Power of 77. The Central Government may give such directions to the State Government of : |
7 Coe ent to Uttar Pradesh and the State Government of Uttaranchal as may appear to it to be necessary ; )
i give for the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the State 3 |
fy directions. Government shall comply with such directions. 3
' : Provisions as 78. (7) The Public Service Commission for the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall, :
!" sate Public on and from the appointed day, be the Public Service Commission for the State of Uttar i
ane Commission. Pradesh. ; i
| (2) The persons holding office immediately before the appointed day as the Chairman 3
| | ‘ or other member of the Public Service Commission for the existing State of Uttar Pradesh :
| 1 shall, as from the appointed day, be the Chairman or, as the case may be, the other member 5 :
| H of the Public Service Commission for the State of Uttar Pradesh. i
| | : (3) Every person who becomes the Chairman or other member of the Public Service i
a Commission for the State of Uttar Pradesh on the appointed“day under sub-section (2), i
a a shall— p
"i : (a) be entitled to receive from the Government of the State of Uttar Pradesh i
! ed conditions of service not less favourable than those to which he was entitled under the i :
i provisions applicable to him; . : 1
“po (6) subject to the proviso to clause (2) of article 316, hold office or continue to . i
ae hold office until the expiration of his term of office as determined under the provisions
| applicable to him immediately before the appointed day. - i
pe » ‘ i
Hy ~ (4) The report of the Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission as to the work done by q
. the Commission in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be presented under . i
es clause (2) of article 323 to the Governors of the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, :
‘i and the Governor of the State of Uttar Pradesh shall, on receipt of such report, cause a i
ip copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining as far as possible, as respects the i
mo cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such i
: non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of the State of Uttar Pradesh and it shall :
noe not be necessary to cause such report or any such memorandum to be laid before the |
} we Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttaranchal. ;
ib PARTIX §
H 1 3
: MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCE® i
! Water 79. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act but subject to the provisions F
| Resources of section 80, all rights and liabilities of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of :
: Development water resource projects in relation to— ; i
Be Management. (4) Ganga and its tributaries traversing the successor States excluding the Upper i
i ‘ Yamuna River up to Okhla; and : i
(i) Upper Yumnuna River and its tributaries up to Okhla, i
shall, on the appointed day, be the rights and liabilities of the successor States in such ;
: proportion as may be fixed, and subject to such adjustments as may be made, by agreement i
entered into by the said States after consultation with the Central Government, or, ifno such i
a agreement is entered into within two years of the appointed day, then, the Central Government :
ne may, by order, determine within one year having regard to the purposes of the project: i
i Li Provided that the order so made by the Central Government may be varied by any 3
fe: subsequent agreement entered into by the successor States after consultation with the Central :
[: Government. . i
HB . €
t (2) An agreement or order referred to in sub-section (/) shall, where an extension or z
cb further development of any of the projects referred to in that sub-section after the appointed i ,
ae day is undertaken, be the rights and liabilities of the successot States in relation to such do
ne extension or further development.

[PAGE 21]
- Be Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY, 21.
a _ _. 3) The rights and liabilities referred to in sub-sections (1) and (2) shall include— ,
(a) the right to receive and utilise the water available for distribution as a ,
. oe result of the projects; and
| (b) the right to receive and utilise the power generated as a result of the
1 projects, :
but shall not include the rights and liabilities under any contract entered into before the
; appointed day by the Government of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh with any person or .
authority other than Government.
: 80. (1) The Central Government shall constitute a Board to be called the Ganga Constitution,
Management Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) for administration, construction, nd functions
; ‘ - maintenance and operation of projects referred to in sub-section (/) of section 79 for any or ome Ganga
for a combination of the following purposes, namely:— eee
+. (i) irrigation; ;
: (ij) rural and urban water supply; ;
; (iii) hydro power generation; =
. ; 7 (iv) navigation;
- { , (v) industries; and . ,
| (vi) for any other purpose which the Central Government may, by notification
| in the Official Gazette, specify.
j ; . (2) The Board shall consist of—
; (a) a whole-time Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government in
consultation with the successor States;
(8) two full time members, one from each of the successor States, to be nominated
] by the respective State Government;
“4 : (c) four part-time members, two from each of the successor States, to be
. nominated by the respective State Govemment;
. (d) two representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by that
’ Government.
. : (3) The functions of the Board shal! include—
F (a) the regulation of supply of water from the projects referred to in clause (i)
| of sub-section (J) of section 79 to the-successor States having regard to—
; ; (i) any agreement entered into or arrangement made covering the
: Government of existing State of Uttar Pradesh and any other State or Union
4 territory, and
(ii) the agreement or the order referred to in sub-section (2) of section 79,
(b) the regulation of supply of power generated at the projects referred to inclause (i) of sub-section (/) of section 79, to any Electricity Board or other authority
in-charge of the distribution of power having regard to—
(i) any agreement entered into, or arrangement made covering the
. Government of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh and any other State or Union
territory, and .
, (iij the agreement or the order referred to in sub-section (2) of section
79; .
(c) the construction of such of the remaining on-going or new works connected
with the development of the water resources projects relating to the rivers or their
‘ tributaries as the Central Government may specify by notification in the Official
Gazette;

[PAGE 22]
I
| 22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr H— i
| : (d) such other functions as the Central Government may, after consultation i .
i with the successor States entrust to it. :
a Staff of the 81. (1) The Board may employ such staff, as it may consider necessary for the :
i Rianagement efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. Such staff shall at the first instance, be i
Boo. . appointed on deputation from the successor State failing which through any other method: z
i Bo Provided that every person who, immediately before the constitution of the said -
Board, was engaged in the construction, maintenance or operation of the works relating to 3
i the projects referred to in clause (i) of sub-section (/) of section 79 shall continue to be so aU
i employed under the Board in connection with the said works on the same terms and conditions F rc
. of service as were applicable to him before such constitution until the Central Government, ;
| by order, directs otherwise: i
| i Provided further that the said Board may, in consultation with the Government of the i
bog successor State or the Electricity Board concerned and with the prior approval of the Central :
ies Government, retain any such person for service under that State Government or Board. ; :
| . (2) The Government of the successor States shall at all times provide the necessary }
Poa funds to the Board to meet all expenses (including the salaries and allowances of the staff) F
oi required for the discharge of its functions and such amounts shall be apportioned between i
wi the States concerned in such proportion as the Central Government may, having regard to i
f the benefits to each of the said States specify. F]
po (3) The Board shall be under the control of the Central Government and shall comply i
f with such directions, as may, from time to time, be given to it by that Government. 3
: ; (4) The Board may delegate such of its powers, functions and duties as it may deem ; ,
: fit to the Chairman of the said Board or to any officer subordinate to the Board. 3
. (5) The Central Government may, for the purpose of enabling the Board to function é
Ls , efficiently, issue such directions to the State Governments concemed, or any other authority, z
a and the State Governments, or the other authority shall comply with such directions. i
Jurisdiction of 82. (1) The Board shall, ordinarily exercise jurisdiction in regard to any of the projects j
1 the Board. referred to in clause (/) of sub-section (7) of section 79 over headworks (barrages, dams, i
reservoirs, regulating structures), part of canal network and transmission lines necessary to iH
i deliver water or power to the States concerned. ; :
i: s (2) \f any question arises as to whether the Board has jurisdiction under sub-section i
fe _ (1) over any project referred thereto, the same shall be referred to the Central Government 2
ot for decision thereon. i
Power of 83. The Board may make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules made i
Boardto make thereunder, to provide for— 3
. regulations. z
: (c} regulating the time and place of meetings of the Board and the procedure to 5
be followed for the transaction of business at such meetings; :
(2) delegation of powers and duties of the Chairman or any officer of the Board; ;
os (o) the appointment and regulation of the conditions of service of the officers i
and other staff of the Board; :
(a) any other matter for which regulations are considered necessary by the Board. 4
Allocalion of 84. (/) The utilisable water resources of the Yamuna River up to Okhla, as allocated, :
so the water before the appointed day, to the existing State of Uttar Pradesh under the Memorandum of §
ma the River of Undertakings, dated the 12th May, 1994 shall be further allocated between the successor i
i Yamurta, States by mutual agreement within a period of two years, failing which, the Central i
Fi Government shall, by order, determine the allocation of such water resource between the §
| : . . successor States within a further period of one year. H
He (2) The State of Uttaranchal shall, on the appointed day, be inducted as a member of |
i ; the Upper Yamuna Board constituted for the implementation of the Memorandum of i
ie Undertaking referred to in sub-section (7). . :
yee 3

[PAGE 23]
PARTX
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
: ‘ 85. On and from the appointed day, in section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act, Aamendmentof
1956, in clause (5), for the words "Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh", the words "Uttar section 15 of
Pradesh, Uttaranchal and Madhya Pradesh" shall be substituted. 1a 3 of
86. The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have affected any change in the Territorial

UP. Act territories to which the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling of Land Holding Act, 1961 extent of laws.

1 of 1961. and any other law in force immediately before-the appointed day, extends or applies, and |
territorial references in any such law to the State of Uttar Pradesh shall, until otherwise |
provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority be construed as meaning |

: the territories within the existing State of Uttar Pradesh before the appointed day.
87. For the purpose of facilitating the. application in relation to the State of Uttar Power to adapt |

: Pradesh or Uttaranchal of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government !aws- |
may, before the expiration of two years from that day, by order, make such adaptations and |

j modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or
expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and

_ modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or

: other competent authority.
’ Explanation.—In this section, the expression “appropriate Government” means as
respects any law relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the Central Govemment,

: and as respects any other law in its application to a State, the State, Government.

88. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made under Power to
section 87 for the adaptation ofa law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or construe laws.
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its
application in relation to the State of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal, construe the law in such
manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the

. matter betore the court, tribunal or authority, .

. 89. The Government of the State of Uttaranchal, as respects the transferred territory Power to name
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the authority, officer or person who, on authorities,
or after the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise such functions exercisable under aanaee ‘ng

| : any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification and such law shall have statutory
effect accordingly. ; functions.

F 90. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Uttar Pradesh Legal
is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities subject ta proceedings.

; . apportionment between the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal under this Act, the State

1 of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal which succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property or

; those rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be substituted
for the existing State of Uttar Pradesh-or added as a party to thase proceedings, and the

| proceedings may continue accordingly.

] . 91. (J) Every proceeding pending immediately before the appointed day before a Transfer of
court (other than High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area Which on that day pending

4 falls within the State of Uttar Pradesh shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the proceedings.
territory, which as from that day are the territories of Uttaranchal State, stand transferred to
the corresponding cous! tribunal, authority or officer of that State.

(2) Ifany question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under ;
sub-section (/) it shall be referred to the High Court at Allahabad and the decision of that
High Court shall be final.
(3) In this section— .
(a) "proceeding" includes any suit, case or appeal; and

[PAGE 24]
{li
-_ 24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part — a
- {b) "corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer" in the State of Uttaranchal i
| bs means— 2
‘f (i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the f
proceeding would have laid if it had been instituted after the appointed day; or 3
II (ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority, or officer in that State, : :
‘ as may be determined aftér the appointed day by the Government of that State z
: or the Central Government, as the case may be, or before the appointed day by i
i the Government of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh to be the corresponding :
' court, tribunal, authority or officer, i
; Right of 92. Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader H
wl pleaders to entitled to practise in any subordinate courts in the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall, for i
pod eee a period of one year from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those courts, i
sg | “notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those i
yo courts has been transferred to the State of Uttaranchal. i
yelt FH
ean Effect of 93. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent i
pl provisionsof therewith contained in any other law. ;
pod the Act i.
j ' inconsistent © H
hy with other j
ie : laws. . i
, Power to 94. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the President ;
i: remove may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to him to be i
‘ difficulties. . . . . 7
; necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty: ;
" Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years }
Ii from the appointed day. 3
: (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament. i
. H
S ®
I i
res, ;
Ais
gi bs

[PAGE 25]
ee senate te Sd
mages © Seed] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25
: THE FIRST SCHEDULE
7 "(See section 8)
a (i) Of the eleven sitting members whose term of office will expire in November, 2002,
4 . namely, Shri Narendra Mohan, Shri Raj Nath Singh, Shri Chaudhary Chunni Lal, Shri Devi
Prasad Singh, Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani, Shri Amar Singh, Shri Mohammad Azam Khan,
: Shri R.N. Arya, Shri Gandhi-Azad, Shri Akilesh Das and Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia, .
Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani shall be deemed to have been elected to fill one seat out of the |
a three seats allocated in the Council of States to the State of Uttaranchal and the other ten |
4 ~ sitting members shall be deemed to have been elected to fill ten of the seats allotted to the |
4 State of Uttar Pradesh. |
~ >. (it) Of the twelve sitting members whose term of office will expire in July, 2004, )
@- °° °, . namely, Shri Arun Shourie, Shri T:N. Chaturvedi, Shri B.P. Singhal, Shri Dharam Pal Yadav, |
: | a Shri Deena Nath Mishra, Shri Ram Gopal Yadav, Shri Kanshi Ram, ShriSangh PriyaGautam, —-
; _ -Shri Munavvar Hasan, Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi, Shri Syed Akhter Hasan Rizvi,
: a _ Shri Rama Shanker Kaushik, such one as the Chairman of the Council of States may
; noe, determine by drawing lot shall be deemed to have been elected to fill one of the seats
allotted to the State of Uttaranchal and the other eleven sitting members shall be deemed to
a . . » have been elected to fill eleven of the seats allotted to the State of Uttar Pradesh.
. : (iii) Of the eleven, sitting Members representing the State of Uttar Pradesh whose
; term of office will expire on 2nd April, 2006, such one as the Chairman of the Council of
States may determine by drawing lot shall be deemed to have been elected to fill one of the
j seats allotted to the State of Uttaranchal.

[PAGE 26]
slg ! POU ee
Ee 26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (Part II— 4
Pia 3
THE SECOND SCHEDULE :
1 (See section 10) i
| AMENDMENTS T0 THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES j
|| OrpER, 1976 i
| ; 7 In the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituency Order, 1976,— 4
| “| 1, In Schedule XXU,— i
| i: ; () in PART A—Parliamentary Constituencies,— '
ty (a) serial numbers I, 2, 3, 4 and 85 and entries relating thereto shall be omitted; ; i
hed | : : :
i i (b) in serial number 12 at the end, the following figures and word shall be i
if na inserted, namely:— :
e A . "$6—Baheri"; i
[ : : (c) in serial number 82 at the end, the following figures and word shall be i
pe inserted, namely:— ; j
ik ;
I ee “416—Deoband”; j
yess H
HF if (d) in serial number 84 at the end, the following figures, brackets and letters i
if shall be inserted, namely:— 3
| “4.15—Nagal (SC); i
| 7 (z/) in PART B—Assembly Constituencies, serial numbers 1 to 16 (both inclusive) i
eit and 420 to 425 (both inclusive) and the entries relating thereto shall be*omitted. :
ea
ee | 2. After Schedule XXII, the following shall be inserted, namely:— q
ied Es
| bai “SCHEDULE XXHA j
le ‘ ~ UTTARANCHAL i
reed : PART A.-—Parliamentary Constituencies a
ti : Serial No., Name and extent in terms of assembly Constituencies r
Hy . 1, Tehri Garhwal.— 1-Uttar Kashi (SC), 2-Tehri, 3-Deoprayag, 4-Mussoorie and i
: 5-Chakrata (ST). 4
m 2. Garhwal.—6-Lansdowne, 7-Pauri, 8-Karanprayag, 9-Badri-Kedar and 10-Dehra Dun. i
j “ 3. Almora-—11-Didihat, 12-Pithoragarh, 13-Almora, 14-Bageshwar (SC) and 15-Ranikhet. 3
Hh 4. Naini Tal.—16-Naini Tal, 17-Khatima (SC), 18-Haldwani and 19-Kashipur. i
| 5. Hardwar (SC) —20-Roorkee, 21-Lhaksar and 22-Hardwar.”. : |
| pa PART B.—Assembly Constituency Ey |
Ff iz Serial No., Name and extent of Constituency Fi
bse i The detailed particulars regarding the name and extent of the Constituencies in each i .
' Ae of the districts in the State of Uttaranchal shall be as delimited by the Election Commission.”. F
a es

[PAGE 27]
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
; . (See section 19)
MODIFICATION IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES -
(Urrar PrapesH) Orper, 1951
1 For the table appended to the Delimitation of Council Constituencies (Uttar Pradesh)
4 ; Order, 1951, the following table shal] be substituted, namely: —
— “TABLE
a
; Name of Constituency Extent of Constituency Number
of
; Seats
Graduates Constituencies
4 c 1. Bareilly-Moradabad Division Bareilly, Pilibhit, Shahjahanpur, Badaun, 1
: ; Graduates Rampur, Moradabad, Jyotibaphule Nagar
and Bijnor districts.
2. Lucknow Division Graduates Lucknow, Hardoi, Kheri, Sitapur, 1
1 Barabanki, Rae Bareli and Pratapgarh
4 . districts.
3. Gorakhpur-Faizabad Division Bahraich, Shravasti, Gonda, Balrampur, 1
} Graduates _ Basti, Siddharthnagar, Santkabir Nagar,
4 Gorakhpur, Maharajganj, Deoria,
; Kushinagar, Azamgarh, Mau, Sultanpur,
, Faizabad and Ambedkarnagar districts.
; + 4. Varanasi DivisionGraduates _ Ballia, Gazipur, Jaunpur, Varanasi, 1
Chandauli, Sant Ravidas Nagar,
; Mirzapur and Sonbhadra districts.
; 5. Altahabad-Jhansi Division Allahabad, Kaushambi, Fatehpur, Banda, 1
Graduates Chitrakoot, Hamirpur, Mahoba, Jalaun,
Jhansi and Lalitpur districts.
6. Kanpur Graduates . Kanpur Nagar and Kanpur Dehat and 1
Unnao Districts.
; 7. Agra Division Graduates Agra, Firozabad, Mathura, Aligarh, 1
4 Hathras, Etah, Mainpuri, Etawah, Kannauj,
4 Auraiya and Farrukhabad districts.
8. Meerut Division Graduates Bulandshahar, Ghaziabad, 1
Gautambuddhnagar, Meerut
Bagpat, Muzaffarnagar and Saharanpur
districts.
Teachers’ Constituencies ;
' {. Bareilly-Mordabad Division __ Bareilly, Pilibhit, Shahjahanpur, 1
* Teachers Badaun, Rampur, Mordabad,
Jyotibaphule Nagar, and Bijnor
districts.

[PAGE 28]
He . ;
li 4 Hy
| 28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY Parr II— os : i aa ic
i 2. Lucknow Division Teachers Lucknow, Hardoi, Kheri, Sitapur, 1 i
| Ea Barabanki, Rae Bareli and 3
‘it Pratapgarh districts. i
I: 3. Gorakhpur-Faizabad Bahraich, Shravasti, Gonda, 1 3
: Division Teachers Balrampur, Basti, Siddarthnagar, H
i Santkabir Nagar, Gorakhpur, :
| | : Maharajganj, Deoria, Kushinagar, i
1 i Azamgarh, Mau, Sultanpur, :
| | | Faizabad and Ambedkarnagar :
Wal ; districts. a
{ | 4. Varanasi Division Teachers Ballia, Gazipur, Jaunpur, Varanasi, i i
(lh ' : Chandauli, Sant Ravidas Nagar, :
i Mirzapur and Sonbhadra districts. i
i | ‘| 5. Allahabad-Jhansi Division Allahabad, Kaushambi, Fatehpur, 1
' I Teachers Banda, Chitrakoot, Hamirpur,
nar Mahoba, Jalaun, Jhansi and Lalitpur
i fe districts. i
| hal 6. Kanpur Teachers Kanpur Nagar and Kanpur Dehat 1
Be and Unnao districts. i
1 ; 7. Agra Division Teachers Agra, Firozabad, Mathura, Aligarh, 1 H
| a Hathras, Etah, Mainpuri, Etawah, £
bi , Kannavuj, Auraiya and Farrukhabad
. districts. i
4 7 8. Meerut Division Teachers Bulandshahar, Ghaziabad, 1 :
bee Gautambuddhnagar, Bagpat, =
oe Meerut, Muzaffarnagar and |
i j ne Saharanpur districts. :
4 H
i ‘ Local Authorities’ Constituencies i
re 1. Morgabad -Bijnor Local Mordabad, Jyotibaphute Nagar, and 1 £
bai Authorities Bijnor districts. i
ne 2. Rampur-Bareilly Local Rampur and Bareilly districts. 1 :
Authorities z
Hh 3. Badaun Local Authorities Badaun district. 1 E
4. Pilibhit Shahjahanpur Local Pilibhit and Shahjahanpur districts. 1 4
a Authorities i
: 5. Hardoi Local Authorities Hardoi district. 1 i
6. Kheri Local Authorities Kheri district. 1 i
{! g
| an 7. Sitapur Local Authorities Sitapur district. 1 :
rE i 8. Lucknow-Unnao Local Lucknow and Unnao districts. 1 i
L ‘ Authorities ;
le 9, Rae Bareli Local Authorities Rae Bareli district. 1 i
ihe 10, Pratapgarh Local Pratapgarh district. I i
i i 1, Authorities .
Hh 11. Sultanpur Local Authorities Sultanpur district 1 a

[PAGE 29]
; a
: 12. Barabanki Local Authorities | Barabanki district. 1 |
13. Bahraich Local Authorities Bahraich and Shravasti districts. l
14. Gonda Local Authorities Gonda district. l
: 15. Faizabad Local Authorities Faizabad and Ambedkarnagar 1
: districts,
; 16. Basti-Siddharth Nagar Basti, Santkabir Nagar and , 1
Local Authorities Siddharthnagar districts.
4 17. Gorakhpur-Mahrajganj Gorakhpur and Mahrajganj districts. 1
. Local Authorities
1. _ 18. Deoria Local Authorities Deoria and Kushinagar districts. 1
. 19. Azamgarh-Mau Local Azamgarh and Mau districts. i
. oi Authorities
; 3 20, Ballia Local Authorities Ballia district. 1
F - 21. Ghazipur Local Authorities Ghazipur district. 1
4 , 22. Jaunpur Local Authorities Jaunpur district. : ‘ I ‘
; i 23, Varanasi Local Authorities Varanasi, Chandauli and Sant 1
§ Ravidasnagar districts.
24. Mirzapur-Sonbhadra Local Mirzapur and Sonbhadra districts. 1
3 Authorities -
25. Allahabad Local Authorities Allahabad and Kaushambi districts. 1
; 26. Banda-Hamirpur Local Banda, Chitrakoot, Hamirpur and 1 ‘
Authorities Mahoba districts. ;
: 27. Thansi-Jalaun-Latitpur Jalaun, Jhansi and Lalitpur districts. 1
. ; ; Local Authorities
; 28. Kanpur-Fatehpur Local Kanpur Nagar and Kanpur Dehat if
; . Authorities and Fatehpur districts.
7 29, Etawah-Farrukhabad Local Etawah, Parrukhabad, Kannavj and 1
3 Authorities Auraiya districts.
30, Agra-Firozabad Local Authorities Agra and Firozabad districts. 1 :
4 31. Mathura-Etah-Mainpuri Mathura, Etah and Mainpuri 2
Local Authorities districts.
: 32, Aligarh Local Authorities Aligarh and Hathras districts. i
: 33. Bulandshahar Local Bulandshahar and !
; Authorities Gautambuddhnagar districts.
: 34. Meerut-Ghaziabad Locat Meerut, Bagpat and Ghaziabad 1
: Authorities districts. .
. 35. .Muzaffarnagar-Saharanpur Muzaffarnagar and Saharanpur 1”.
Local Authorities districts.
; we

[PAGE 30]
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
(See section 20) ‘
List of members of the Legislative Council of Uttar Pradesh who shall cease to be
such members on the appointed day and deemed to be the members of the Provisional
Legislative Assembly:— ;
1. Shri Nitya Nand Swami.
2. Dr. (Smt) Indira Hridayesh. ;
3. Shri Narayan Singh Rana.
f 4. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat.
. 5. Shri Sri Prakash Pant. ‘ F
6. Shri Devendra Shastri. ;
! 7. Smt. Nirupama Gaur.
8. Shri Bhagat Singh Koshiyari. : i
9. Shri Isham Singh. :
i i
|
j
i

[PAGE 31]
; | a Sec. | ] ‘THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY ar,
} ‘ a TTS \
i .
; THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
(See section 24)
i AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CasTEs) Orper, 1950
| In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,— oO
i (a) in paragraph 2, for the figures ‘“XXNI”’, the figures ‘‘XXIV’’ shall be
. substituted; ‘
(4) in the Schedule, after Part XXIII, the following shall be inserted, namely:—
4 “PART XXIV—Uttaranchal
\ 1. Agariya
2. Badhik
3. Badi
4. Baheliya
5. Baiga ,
_ 6. Baiswar
7. Bajaniya
8. Bajgi ;
9. Balhar .
7 ’ 10. Balai
: 11. Balmiki
12. Bangali
13. Banamanus
14. Bansphor
15. Barwar
16. Basor
17. Bawariya ;
= 18, Beldar
19. Beriya
20. Bhantu :
: 21. Bhuiya
| . 22. Bhuyiar
: 23. Boria .
. 24. Chamar, Dhusia, Jhusia, Jatava
25, Chero .
26. Dabgar .
| 27. Dhangar ;
\ 28. Dhanuk
| 29. Dharkar
| 30. Dhobi .
i 31. Dom
: 32. Domar .
: 33, Dusadh
: 34, Dharmi
So 35, Dhariya
: 36. Gond
: 37. Gwal
‘ 38. Habura
: 39. Hari :
: 40. Hela
7 41. Kalabaz
i 42. Kanjar .
43. Kapariya :
wd ®
fa
sect eens INMOCDORE rst

[PAGE 32]
. 32 . THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr f1-— r
44. Karwal
45. Kharaita
46. Kharwar (excluding Vanwasi)
47. Khatik
48, Kharot
49. Kol
50. Kori :
51. Korwa
52. Lalbegi
53. Majhwar
54. Mazhabi
55. Musahar
56. Nat
57. Pankha
58. Parahiya,
59. Pasi, Tarmali
: 60. Patari .
61. Sahariya : -
: 62. Sanaurhiya
63. Sansiya
64. Shilpkar
65, Turaiha.”. .
w

[PAGE 33]
: "See. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
: (See section,25)
: AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950
: " In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950,—~
: (1) in paragraph 2, for the figures “XX”, the figures “XXI” shall be substituted:
: (2) in the Schedule, after Part XX, the following Part shall be inserted,
} namely:
: “Part XXI.—Uttaranchal .
.
3 1. Bhotia. ‘ .
| 2. Buksa.
: 3. Jannsari.
- 4 4. Raji.
5. Tharu.”. i
$
i
i
i
j
i
. |

[PAGE 34]
34 , THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part Ii—
. ; THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE ®
(See section 47)
: List oF FUNDS
1. Depreciation Reserve Fund—Irrigation.
2. Depreciation Reserve Fund—Government Press.
3. Depreciation Reserve Fund-—Precision Instrument Factory. -
4. Rural Development Fund.
5. Famine Relief Fund.
6. Sugar Research and Labour Housing Management Fund.
7. Zamindari Abolition Fund.
8. U. P. Road Fund.
9. Hospital Fund.
10. Teachers Gratuity Fund. .
11. State Bridge Fund. ‘
12, General Insurance Fund.
13, Nazul Fund. ;
14. State Co-operative Development Fund.
15. Agriculture Credit Relief and Security Fund. :
16. Farmer Relief Fund. ,
17. Depreciation Reserve Fund-Power.
18. Contingency Reserve Fund-Power.
19. Sugar Factory Rehabilitation, Modernisation and Establishment Fund,
. 20. Cane Research and Development Fund.
21. Consolidated Reduction on Debt Fund for State Development Lan and Zamindari
Abolition and Compensation Bond. :
1 22. Police House Building Fund.
. 23. Fourth Class House Building Fund.
: 24. Government Servant Housing Fund. . :
25. Balanced Area Development Fund. :
26. U.P. Youth Welfare Fund.
27. U.P. Student Welfare Fund. ‘
28. Language Fund.
29. Police Welfare Fund.
30. Acharya Narendra Deo Fund. .
31. Calamity Relief Fund,
32. Purvanchal Development Fund.
33. Bundelkhand Development Fund.
34. Loan Assistance Fund for payment of Cane Prices.
35. Relief for Productivity Research and Modernisation of Sick Industrial Units.
36. Secretariat Fund.
; 37. Vidhayak Nidhi.

[PAGE 35]
: S81], . THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35
: . a THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE
: . Se ° (See section 54) . ;
APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY. IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS
’ 1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the successer
States shall, in respect of pensions granted before the appointed day by the existing State
: of Uttar Pradesh, pay the pensions drawn in its treasuries. ;
2. Subject to the said adjustments, the liability in fespect of pensions of officers
serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh who retire or
. proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before the appointed day, but whose claims for
pensions are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the liability of the State of
Uttar Pradesh.

: 3, There shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the appointed

; day and ending on such date after the appointed day, as may be fixed by the Central

i Government and in respect of each subsequent financial year, the total payments made in

i all the successor States in respect of pensions referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2. The total

} representing the liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of pensions shall ;

i be apportioned between the successor States in the population ratio and any successor

i State paying the State paying more than its due share shall be reimbursed the excess amount

; by the successor State or State paying less.

i

‘ i 4. The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of pensions granted

; - before the appointed day and drawn in any area outside the territories of the existing State

‘ shall be the liability of the State of Uttar Pradesh subject to adjustments to be made in

: accordance with paragraph 3 as if such pensions had been drawn in any treasury in the

; State of Uttar Pradesh under paragraph 1.

: 5. (1) The liability in respect of the pension of any officer serving immediately before

: the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh and

: retiring on or after that day, shall be that of the successor State granting him the pension;

: but the portion of the pension attributable to the service of any such officer before the

i appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall be

: allocated between the successor States in the population ratio, and the Government granting

: . the pension shall be entitled to receive from each of the other successor States its share of

: this liability. -

(2) 1f any such officer was serving after the appointed day in connection with the
affairs of more than one successor State other than the one granting the pension shall
reimburse to the Government by which the pension is granted an amount which bears to the
portion of the pension attributable to his service after the appointed day the same ratio as

: the period of his qualifying service after the appointed day under the reimbursing State

: bears to the total qualifying service of such officer after the appointed day reckoned for the

an purposes of pension.

: . 6. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension shall be construed as including a .

: reference to the commuted value of the pension.

|

[PAGE 36]
THE NINTH SCHEDULE ,
(See section 66)
List oF GOVERNMENT COMPANIES
S. Name of Government Company Address
No.
i. Uttar Pradesh Bhumi Sudhar Bhumitra Bhawan, 19-B, Vibhuti
Nigam Ltd. Khand, Gomati Nagar, Lucknow.
2. Uttar Pradesh Agro Industrial 22, Vidhan Sabha Marg, Lucknow.
Corporation Ltd.
3. Uttar Pradesh Alpasankhyak 7th Floor, Jawahar Bhawan,
; Vittiya Nigam Ltd. Lucknow.
4. Uttar Pradesh Electronic Nav Chetna Kendra, Ashok Marg, ;
Corporation Ltd. Lucknow.
5. Uttar Pradesh Jal Vidyut Nigam 12th Floor, Vikas Deep, Station
Ltd. Road, Lucknow. .
6. Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidyut ’ 4-B, Gokhle Marg, Lucknow.
Utpadan Nigam Ltd.
7. Uttar Pradesh Leather 16/58-A, Sadar Bhati Road, Agra.
Development and Marketing
Corporatior Ltd.
: 8. Uttar Pradesh Export Corporation 2, Rana Pratap Marg, Lucknow.
Ltd.
; 9. Uttar Pradesh State Food and 17, Gokhle Marg, Lucknow.
Essential Commodities .
. Corporation Ltd.
10. Uttar Pradesh Small Industries 110, Industrial Estate, Fazalganj,
Corporation Lid. Kanpur.
11. Uttar Pradesh State Handloom Hathkargha Bhawan, G.T. Road,
Corporation Ltd. Kanpur. os
4 12. Uttar Pradesh Police Awas Nigam A-81, Vijay Khand-II, Gomati ;
Ltd. Nagar, Lucknow.
‘13. Provincial Industrial Investment PICUP Bhawan, Gomati Nagar,
. Corporation of Uttar Pradesh Lucknow.
*(PICUP) Ltd.
14. The Indian Turpentine and Rosin Culucttarbuckganj, Bareilly.
Company Ltd.
15. Uttar Pradesh State Cement Churk, Sonbhadra.
Corporation Ltd.
16. Uttar Pradesh State Mineral Kapurthal Complex, Aliganj,
Development Corporation Ltd. Lucknow.
17. Uttar Pradesh State Taxtile Vastra Bhawan, Sharda Nagar,
Corporation Ltd. Kanpur. ;
18. Uttar Pradesh State Industrial A-1/4, Lakhanpur, P.O. Box No.
Nevelopment Corporation Ltd. 1150, Kanpur.
19. Uttar Pradesh Project and Left Bank, Gomati Bairaj, Gomati
Tubewells Corporation Ltd. Nagar, Lucknow.
20. Uttar Pradesh Mahila Kalyan B-2/5, Vikas Khand, Gomati
Nigam Ltd. * Nagar, Lucknow.
"21. ‘Uttar Pradesh Matsya Vikas 4/13-14, Vivek Khand, Gomati -
Nigam Ltd. Nagar, Lucknow.
a

[PAGE 37]
S. Name of Government Company © * ~ Address . !
Sa i
22. Uttar Pradesh Panchayati Raj Vitta C-232, Niralanagar, Lucknow.
"Nigam Lid, ; oe ; ae:
23. Uttar Pradesh Pashudhan Udyog - Central Dairy Farm, Aligarh.
Nigam Ltd. : ;
24. — Uttar Pradesh Pichhara Varg Vitta PCF Building, 4th Ftoor, Station
Evam Vikas Nigam Ltd. Road, Lucknow.
_ 25. Uttar Pradesh. Poultry and Livestock Campus Animal Husbandry, i
Specialities Ltd. . Badshahbagh, Lucknow. i
.: 26. Uttar Pradesh Development 9, Sarojini Naidu Marg, Lucknow.
Systems Corporation Ltd. :
: "27. Uttar Pradesh State Bridge 16, Madan Mohan Malviya Marg,
! , Corporation Ltd. Lucknow. {
: 28. Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Vishveshwaraiya Bhawan, Gomati .
i Nigam Ltd. ‘ Nagar, Lucknow. :
29. Uttar Pradesh Anusuchit B°912, Sector C. Mahanagar,
: . _ Jati/Janjati Vikas Nigam Ltd. Lucknow.
: 30. Uttar Pradesh Samaj Kalyan “Lekhraj Market, Indira Nagar,
: Nirman Nigam Ltd. © - Lucknow,
: 31. Uttar Pradesh Bhootpurva Sainik 54-X, Jopling Road, Lucknow.
Kalyan Nigam Ltd.
32, Uttar Pradesh (Madhya) Ganna New Berry Road, Near Deputy .
Beej Vikas Nigam Ltd. Cane Commissioner’s Office,
. Lucknow,’
' ‘ 33. Uttar Pradesh (Paschim) Ganna Circular Road, Near Ganna Kisan
: Beej Vikas Nigam Ltd. Sansthan, Muzaffarnagar. ‘
: 34. Uttar Pradesh (Poorva) Ganna HIG-VI, Acharya Ram Chandra
. . Beej Vikas Nigam Ltd. ; Shukla Nagar, Deoria.
oo 35. Uttar Pradesh (Rohilkhand Terai) 26-27, B.D.A. Colony, Shahamatganj,
: . Ganna Beej Vikas Nigam Ltd. Barielly.. ;
: 36.. Uttar Pradesh State Sugar Vipin Khand, Near Taj Hotel,
. Corporation Ltd. Gomati Nagar, Lucknow.
37. Uttar Pradesh Tourism Chitrahar-3, Nawal Kishore Road, ‘
Corporation Ltd. Lucknow,
38. ,~Garhwal Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd. 74, Rajpur Road, Dehradun.
37 Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam ~ Oak Park House, Malii Tal, : .
' Ltd. Nainital. - .
40. Uttar Pradesh Hill Electronics B-2/140, Vishal Khand Gomati
: Corporation Ltd. Nagar, Lucknow. ‘
41. Uttar Pradesh Wagf Vikas Nigam First Floor, 118, Jawahar Bhawan,
: Ltd, Lucknow.
42. Uttar Pradesh Seed and Tarai Haldi, Pantnagar, Udhamsinghnagar.
Development Corporation Ltd.
43. _Kumaon Anusuchit Janjati Vikas Raj Mahal Hotel Campus, Malli Tal,
Nigam Ltd. Nainital. .
. “ay Garhwal Anusuchit Janjati Vikas 74, Rajpur Road, Dehradun.
. ‘Nigam Ltd. :

[PAGE 38]
|
. |
' 38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part li—
THE TENTH SCHEDULE
(See section 71)
; CONTINUANCE OF FACILITIES IN CERTAIN STATE INSTITUTIONS
"List of Training Institutions/Centres : .
1. Uttar Pradesh Academy of Administration, Nainital ‘
. 2. Uttar Pradesh State Observatory, Nainital :
3. Institute of Management Development Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow j
4. Judicial Training and Research Institute, Lucknow
5. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar Police Academy, Moradabad -
6. Police Training College-II, Moradabad , ‘
7. - Police Training College-Iil, Gorakhpur : i
8. Armed Training Centre, Sitapur
9. Police Training College, Moradabad an :
10. Police Training College, Gorakhpur nn ;
Il. Recruit Training Centre, Chunar, Mirzapur
12. ° Police Training College, Unnao
13. Sampurnanand Prison Training Institute, Lucknow
14. Secretariat Training and Management Institute, Lucknow i |
15. Raja Todarmal Survey and Land Records Institute, Hardoi ' |
16. Land Consolidation Training Coliege, Ayodhya, Faizabad |
17. State Engineers’ Training Institute, Kalagarh |
18. U.P. Water and Land Management Institute, Lucknow /
19. Institute of Financial Management Training and Research, Lucknow .
‘ 20. Cooperative and Panchayat Audit Training Centre, Ayodhya, Faizabad
: ‘ 21. Local Funds Accounts and Audit Training Institute, Allahabad
22. Trade Tax Officers’ Training Institute, Lucknow
23. State Electricity Board Training Institute, Dehradun
24. U.P. State Electricity Board Staff College, Dehradun .
. 25. Thermal Power Training Institute, UPSEB, Obra, Sonbhadra
26. Central Civil Defence Training Institute, Lucknow ‘
27. Deen Dayal Upadhyay State Institute of Rural Development, Bakshi Ka Talab,
Lucknow
28. Minor Irrigation Management and Water Management Training Institute, Bakshi
Ka Talab, Lucknow ;
29. Smt. Indira Gandhi Cooperative Institute, Lucknow
, 30. Cooperative Training College, Dehradun
31. Agriculture Cooperative Staff Training Institute, Lucknow
32. Institute of Cooperative, Corporate Management Research and Training, Indira po
: Nagar, Lucknow : |
33. U.P. Gane Development Institute, Lucknow ne |

[PAGE 39]
Sec. | ] PHE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39
34. Uttar Pradesh State Transport Corporation Training Institute, Kanpur
35. Uttar Pradesh State Education Research and Training Board, Allahabad
36. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Research and Training Institute, Lucknow
37. Hotel Management and Catering Institute, Dehradun
38. Research, Development and Training Institute, Kanpur
39. Uttar Pradesh Excise Training Institute, Rae Bareili
40. Central Workers Education Board, Kanpur
41. State Institute of Health and Family Welfare, Indira Nagar. Lucknow
42. Office of the Inspector of Officers, U.P. Allahabad
43, State Planning Institute, Training Division, Kalakankar House, Old Hyderabad,
Lucknow
43. Institute of Entrepreneurship Development, Lucknow
45. Hotel Management and Catering Institute, Almora
46. Moti Lal Nehru Regional! Engineering College, Allahabad
47, State Architecture College, Lucknow
48. Central Textile Institute, Kanpur
43, Institute of Engineering and Rural Technology, Allehabad
50. Northern Regional Institute of Printing Technology, Allahabad
di. Khadi and Gramodyog Beard, 8, Tilak Marg, Lucknow
82. Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Technology for Handicapped, Kanpur
53. Government Leather Institute, Agra
54. Government Leather Institute, Kanpur
$5. Joint Entrance Examination Council, Lucknow
SUBHASH C. JAIN
Secy. to the Govt. of India.
“PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS (PLU), MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2000,