[PAGE 1]
Thtedt Ho Ato 321 REGISTERED No, D. 221
WRa sy SIRE |
Che Gazette of India
RATT
EXTRAORDINARY
| am Uae 3-aqaw’ (ii)
| PART I—Section 3—Sub-section (ii)
Sify & sentir
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
Fo 40] ae facet, aaary, wert 5, 1968/Ara 16, 1889 |
No, 40] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 1968/MAGHA 16, 4889
SS STE SE
Bet TT HF Free ees etear My arte B Frere fir og seer eiwrer we F eT ot A
Separate paging Is given to this Part in order that it may be filed
aS ® Separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the Sth February 1968

§.Q. 481.—In exercise of the powers conferred hy section 21 of the Unlawful
Activitles (Prevention) Act. 1967 (37 of 1967). the Central Government hereby
makes the fullowing rules, namely:---

1. Short tttle and commencement-—(1) These rules may be galled the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Rules. 1968.

(2) They shall come into force on the date of thelr publication in the Official
Gazette.

2. Definitions —In these rules. unless the context otherwise requires, —

(a) “the Act” means the Unlaw?nl Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37
of 1967):

(b) “section” means a section .of the Act:

(c) words and expressions used in these rules but not defined. and defined
{n the Act. shall have the meunings respectively assigned to thern in
the Act.

3. Tribunal and District Judge to foilow rules of evidence.—(1) In holding an
inquiry under suh-section (3) of section 4 or disposing of any anplication under
sub-seetion (4) of seetion 7 ar sub-section (8) of sectton 8. the Tribunal or the
pisirict Judge, as the case may pe. shall. subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2)
follaw. as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indi i '
Act. 1872 (1 of 3872). © indian Evidenoa

(87 )

[PAGE 2]
88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (Paar It

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act. 1872,
where any books of account or other documents are claimed by the Central Government to be of a confidential nature, the Tribunal or the Court of the District
Judge shall not—

(a) compel that Government to produce before it such books of account or
other documents, or
(o) where any such books of account or other documents have heen pro.
duced before It by that Government,—
(1) make such books of account or other documents a part of (he records
of the proceedings before it, or
(i) give inspection of, or copy of the whole of. or any extract from,
any such hooks of account or other documents to any party before
it or to any other person.

«. Additional modes of service of notification made under section 3.—-Without
prejudice to the generality of the Provisions of sub-section (4) of section 3, all
or any of the following modes may also be followed in effecting service of a notification made under sub-section (1) of section 3a, namety:—

(a) by making an announcement over the radio from the Jocal or nearest
broadcasting station of the All-Indla Radio, or

(b) by pasting the notification on the notice board of the office of the
District Magistrate or the Tehsildar at the headquarters of the district
or the tehsil, o8 the case may be, in which the principal office of the
association affected is sttuated.

5. Doouments which should accompany a reference to the ‘Tribuna).—-Every
reference made to the Tribunal under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be accompanied by—

() a copy of the notlfication made under sub-section (1) of section 3, and
(i) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are
based:

Provided that nothing in this rule shall require the Central Government to
disclose any fact to the Tribanal which that Government considers against the
public interest to disclose.

8. Service of notice issued by the Tribunal.—Every notice referred to in subsection (2) of section 4 shall be served on the affected assoclation in such manner
as the Tribunal may think fit and al] or any of the following modes may be followed by the Tribunal tn effecting service of such notice, namely:—

(a) by affixing a copy of the notice to some conspicuous part of fhe office,
if any, of the association: or

(>) by serving a copy of the notice. where possible, on the Principal office
bearers, if any, of the association. by registered post or otherwise; or

(c) by proclaiming by beat of drum or by means of loudspeakers the contents of the noti(lcation in the area {n which the activittes of the
association are ordinarily carried on.

7. Tribunal to have a seal—(1) The Tribunal shall have a seal of such dimensions and in such form as It may think fit

(2) Every order made or notice {ssued by the Tribunal shall be authenticated
by affixing tee seal thereon.

8. Tribunal to have a Registrar—(1) The Tribunal sball have a Registrar who
shall be either a whole-time or part-time officer of the Government.

(2) The Registrar shall have the custody of the seal and the records of the
‘Tribupal and shall exercise such olher fumetions as may be assigned to him by

the Trfbunal.

[PAGE 3]
SEc. Bit) THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 89
a =SRRIEDiinEtEEE, a: —
9. Reference te the Tribunal to be addressed to the Registrar —Every reference
made to the Tribunal under section 4 shall be addressed and sent to the Registrar
who shall. immediately after the receipt of such reference or as soon as possible
thereafter. place the same before the Chairman for his orders.
{No. F. 22/1/68-PolL.I(A).]
On behalf and in the name of the President of India.
L. P. SINGH, Secy.
PRINTED IN INDIA by THE GENERAL MANAGER, OVERNMENT 0 or INTRA PRESB ——
NEW DOLIHT AND PUNLISHED SY THE MANAGER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 988