[PAGE 1]
F No. 24013/12/C.C./2013-CSR.III
Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs
(CS Division)
RRKK
NDCC-II Building, Jai Singh Road, New Delhi
Dated 20" May 2015
SUBJECT:-Suggestions regarding Amendment to the Prevention of
Damage to Public Property Act 1984 by the Prevention of
Damage to Public Property Act (Amendment) Bill, 2015
The Supreme Court vide an order dated 18-06-2007 (in the matter of Writ
Petition (Crl.) No. 77/2007), had set up a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Mr. Justice K T Thomas, former Judge of the Supreme Court, to examine
modalities to be adopted to make the Prevention of Damage to Public Property
Act, 1984 (PDPP Act, 1984) more effective and also suggest suitable changes,
which could make the Statute more meaningful.

2. The Committee concluded that the present law was inadequate and
ineffective to deal with the increasing number of instances of public property
damages and made some recommendations for amendment in the Prevention of
Damage to Public Properties Act, 1984. Accepting the recommendations of the
Justice K T Thomas Committee, the Ministry of Home Affairs has proposed
amendments in the PDPP ACT, 1984. Proposed amendments seek to deter the
prospective violators from vandalizing and destroying public/private property during
agitations and other forms of protests. Importantly, the proposed amendments will

also deter the office-bearers of these organizations.

; 3. The present provision of the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act,
1984 is at Annexure-| and the proposed draft Prevention of Damage to Public
Property Act (Amendment) Bill, 2015 is at Annexure-l|
4. The suggestions/comments on the proposed draft PDPP Act
(Amendment) Bill, 2015 from the Public and other stakeholders are solicited on or
before 20" July 2015 and the same may be sent to the Ministry of Home Affairs,
CS Division, 5" Floor, NDCC Building, Jai Singh Road, New Delhi-1100@1. The
suggestion could also be sent on e-mail: dircs1-mha@mha.gov.in. (dw

Kamar AG
(Kumar ATo
Joint Secretary

[PAGE 2]
Annexure-I
PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY ACT, 1984 (3 OF 1984)
An Act to provide for prevention of damage to public property and for matters connected therewith.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —
1. This Act may be called the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984.
2. It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
3. It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 28th day of January, 1984.
2. Definitions.-
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,a. "mischief' shall have the same meaning as in section 425 of the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1.860);
b. "public property" means any property, whether immovable or movable (including put any machinery) which is
owned by, or in the possession of, or under the control of —
i, the Central Government; or
ii. any State Government; or
iii. any local authority; or
iv. any corporation established by, or under, a Central, Provincial or State Act or
v. any company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); or
vi. any institution, concern or undertaking which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify in this behalf:
Provided that the Central Government shall not specify, any institution, concern or undertaking under this
sub-clause unless such institution, concern or undertaking is financed wholly or substantially by funds
provided directly or indirectly by the Central Government or by one or more State Governments, or partly
by the Central Government and partly by one or more State Governments.
3. Mischief causing damage to public property. —(1) Whoever commits mischief by doing any act in respect of any
public property, other than public property of the nature referred to in sub-section (2), shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine.
(2) Whoever commits mischief by doing any act in respect of any public property being —
2 The Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984
a. any building, installation or other property used in connection with the production, distribution or
supply of water, light, power or energy ;
b. any oil installation;
c. any sewage work;
d. any mine or factory;
e. any means of public transportation or of tele-communications, or any building, installation or other property
used in connection therewith shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than six months, but which may extend to five years and with fine:

[PAGE 3]
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in its judgment, award a sentence of imprisonment for a
term of less than six months.
4. Mischief causing damage to public property by fire or explosive substance.-
Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 3 by fire or explosive substance
shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may
extend to ten years and with fine:
Provided that the court may, for special reasons to be recorded in its judgment, award a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year.
5. Special provisions regarding bail.-
No person accused or convicted of an offence punishable under section 3 or section 4 shall, if in custody,
be released on bail or on his own bond unless the prosecution has been given an Opportunity to oppose
the application for such release.
6. Saving.-
The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law
for the time being in force, and nothing contained in this Act shall exempt any person from any
proceeding (whether by way of investigation or otherwise) which might apart from this Act, be instituted
or taken against him.
7. Repeal and saving.i, The Prevention of Damage to Public Property Ordinance, 1984 (Ord. 3 of 1984), is hereby
repealed.
2, Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall
be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

[PAGE 4]
Annexure-Il
DRAFT BILL TO AMEND THE PREVENTION OF DESTRUCTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY ACT
(PDPPA), 1984
Provisions of THE PREVENTION OF DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY
[POPPA | AMeNDMENT) BLL 201g TO PURIG PROPERTY |
A
So
RE cenaeianinind ee oi
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fifth year of the Republic of India
te ee eee |
Short title and|1. (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Damage to Public
oman ese rman seme |
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
___|Prmeinccat pernME |
Amendment 2. In the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984 (hereinafter | 3 of 1984
of Act 3 of referred to as the principal Act), after the words “and with fine”, wherever
1984. they occur, the words “which shall be equivalent to the market values of
the public property damaged” shall be inserted.
Amendment 3. In the principle Act, in section 2, after clause (a), the following
=
lel ee |
Amendment 4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the proviso, for
of section 3. the words “for reasons”, the words” for special reasons” shall be
bial Setesetiaiedaieeeiemeaaiel BA
Insertion of 5. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
new sections inserted, namely:-
4A, 4B, 4C
and 4D
Presumption “AA. Where an offence under this Act has been committed and it is
against accused | shown that public property has been damaged as direct consequence of
such offence and the accused participated in the commission of such
offence, it shall be presumed unless the contrary is shown that the
accused had committed such offence.
Abetment _ of 4B. Where damage to public property is caused in consequence of
mischief demonstration, hartal or bandh called by any organisation, the officebearers of such organization, shall be deemed to be guilty of the

[PAGE 5]
commission of the offence of abetment of an offence punishable under
this Act and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any
such office bearer liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if
he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
Punishment 4C. Whoever abets an offence punishable under this Act shall be
for abetment punished with the punishment provided for that offence under this Act.
of mischief
Procedure for 4D Where a call for demonstration, hartal or bandh has been given by an
Videography Organisaiton and the officer-in-charge of a police station has reasons to
of incidents of believe that damage to the public property is likely to be caused or there
demonstration is imminent danger of such damage, he shall,etc
(i) make such arrangements for the videography of the area where
the demonstration, hartal or bandh is proposed to be held;
(ii) deposit the soft copies of videography in such manner, with the
concerned Sub-Divisional Magistrate or Executive Magistrate
who may entrust the same to said police officer or any other
person;
(iii) get the statement of the videographer recorded before Sub-
Divisional Magistrate or Executive Magistrate in such manner,
as may be prescribed.:”
Amendment 6. In Section of the principal Act:eae ee ee
(i) after the words and figure “or section 4”, the words and figure “or
[a
(ii) after the words “for such release”, the words “and there are
reasonable grounds to believe that he is not guilty of the said offence”
shall be inserted.
Insertion of 7. After section 6 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
new sections inserted, namely:oe | ae ee
[Power to | "6A. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official |S

[PAGE 6]
ee ee
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:-
(a) the arrangement for videography under section 4D; and
(b) the manner of depositing the soft copies of videography and
recording the statement of the videographer under Section 4D.
Rules to be 6B. Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be
laid before laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.”