[PAGE 1]
vised Ge Sho wee-33004/99 Pete _REGD.NO.D.L.-33004/99
Che Gazette of India
ATT ’
EXTRAORDINARY
UT WUE 3—ST-WVE (i).
. PART Il—Section 3—Sub-section (i)
wifrart & waniere
nD ayant nna
% 462) 7” i ag facet, quarc, feat 27, 2006 /anfvar 5, 1928 — :
No. 462} NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 2006/ASVINA 5, 1928
We dares 3, Tete ardenktet aff grr onqafta at
afirgert wrt are wirear—(1) ueta arfenttot afafa a
7g faeett, 27 fanart, 2006 ; aera, wa at arte at, Sata wen S Freel s
aah, 597(3).—_ att eer, arma wae. frat A ed finer ot Oftral S at Toes whe
afufran, 2005 (2005 #1 53) BT eR 75 et sea «= BUT a aPfasa A Ba
(1) # ae vfaa seat see (2) B BE (7) sik (2) wea ertenftot afhfs @ areca wt, era
OS (4) ERI veR eft ar watt ad EY, Pate Reef a atta mardanftott afafe at eet an fist wife
Fram wach @, ater, :~ ar watt aed at wfer ehh fiery Cet eferet ar watt
_ 1. Aer are afte arte. —C) et Pert a gta artanfton aff gre arganeta @ sreaeiia Bm
Se am a St aro Po Cafe (3) wedta aerfemftot a ateaer, wee airtanttot
) Fra, 2006 @ | fifa et taal YT orexer tm :
(2) a tea F era Gara a ate at vga :
ah aq usta araet afi at fedt ton 7
. oy . Ra HA A sas arene wa at an a, ae wets
2 (1) Rrra ae Fe REE tte afi @ weal a Pret ew wh tor a
2005 (2005 #153) afrta 2; (4) weate areteitont afte a seqar—
(eq) Hemet" SB are 8 BT TT (2) F Cm) wets ardanftet afafs & seca a wo 7
aes udiararenttot afita ar areqey sae pel S frada A saat Tern HI F
(1) “ugea' SUNT 8 st sya (2) F (ea) Usa ardenttoh afta st daat 8 waft afar adm weta artentiot afta ar ae afacrs wad & faz;
; z
(a) “ure” arfafiae af are sift; (1) ae ghee at & fee sega ere Ft
“ n fore westa arienioh afaft at sont F fer
- Ce) srefafer” @ MAT 9 Bsa SAT C1) ay fatreaal ot ware @ arate fase aren 2;
_ 8 ats usta erderiet afifa et ott _
—oafse suai afta 2
Qamistnis, deiweatsks @ Barge ae s for st seg oe ae
Prat vftentirn wet & faeq aftr 3 vitentin @, wt iar ee, °
aét wef eh at afurag Yaar: ora 21 Ue a sift axftrannt aaPateee at Tes
3942 G1/2006 Q) viet

[PAGE 2]
2 . THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY {Part II—Szc. 3)"
(5) asa artanttott atafa wr aeae, weety " _ @ “section” means a section of the Act; .
artanitet afafa at aoe a fea, aaa sik ware Firfeaa - (©) “sub-committee” means a sub-committee
constituted by the National Executive
=U! .
; __ . Committee under Sub-section (1) of
“S (6) eapaaeibel ial araran et, ~ Section 9. a ”
dan abt faqs A HA hedichiiede sree Stitt! _ @) Words and expressions used herein and not
o_O) SR arate wits art dag at we 8 - defiried in these rules but defined inthe Act
aa at fea at ofr qe Oh she sean ariga vitafea . shal) have'the meanings respectively assigned
wot wa ae St fat wpe ara B wet We aN ara to them in the Act. a
“asta ardanttot afte ete aik Thea afifrad Bet + Committee.—(1) The Chairperson of the National
far vine doe eth H } Executive Committee may, as and when réquired, in the
- implementation of the directions of the Central Government,

(8) Teta wife, wa Ht areas et, at Gea S seek guidance from the National Authority as to the
Pretest Ff aera ae Ss few wet aefaritet aft —-— modalities of such implementation.
frat cee at omifia ae aT | ; (2) The Chairperson of the National Executive

(9) usta arfanfct afhfa, act wae aon a Committee shall, in case of emergency, have the power to

safe eS far fate aria ota S ey A ots exercise all or any of the powers of the National Executive
a fafa. af ‘ f Committee but exercise of such powers shall be subject to
= ry A AK at arf ratification by the National Executive Committee:
sil : (3) The Chairperson of the National Executive
~ (10) wage artaniet afafa wale dan ot arige Committee shall preside over the meetings of the National ~
asta wifrern at atid Bh Executive Committee :

4, Weta ardenttof afte at srathis & are Provided that in the case of his inability to preside
fasted @ wo F aeqaa safe wt ae fing wr ae over any meeting of the National Executive Committee, he *
ae.—a 9 sae (1) S ata aise srefhfa S shall nominate one of members of the National Executive

: alta am wet alk Shrew uat andere fee Committee to preside over the meeting. [
st 2 a . Lag ; (4) The Chairperson of the National Executive
Hr aA 190 ° tfere-2 4 aenfattine Sata wea Committee may nominate one or more officers :---
ERT eA q aftfeal at toest a safer a ae aera (a) to assist him in the performance of his
ofranttal a ara 21 functions as the Chairperson of the National
[%1. &. 30/9/2005-GrS1TH. 3(Z) J Executive Committee; :
aay aat, Saad afaa (6) to maintain proper records relating to the
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS ; meetings of the National Executive Committee;
: NOTIFICATION (c) to take follow up action to ensure that the
~. + New Delhi, the 27th September, 2006 , . decisions taken in the meetings of the National

G.S.R. 597(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred Executive Committee are implemented in time;
by clauses (c) and-(d) of Sub-section (2) read with and . . ‘
Sub-section (1) of Section 75 of the Disaster Management (d) to perform such other functions as the
Act, 2005. (53 of 2005), the Central Government hereby Chairperson may desire them to perform.
makes the following rules, namely :— “ (5) The Chairperson of the National Executive

1. Short title and commencement.— (1) These rules Committee shall decide the day, time and place of a meeting
may be called the Disaster Management Nafional Executive of the National Executive Committee
Committee (Procedures and Allowances) Rules, 2006. : : ani

(2) They shall come into force oii the date of their (6) The National Executive Committee shall meet as
publication in the Official Gazette, often as necessary but at least once in three months.

2. Definitions.— (1) In these rules, unless the context : ) The Nation al Executive Committee shall give

" otherwise requires -— : notice of its meeting and circulate its agenda at least three
-(a) “Act” means the Disaster Management Act, days in advance, unless there is an emergency situation
oo 2005 (53 of 2005); on occurrence of a major disagter or a situation of such a
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of threatening disaster, when the National Executive
: the National Executive Committee under Committee shall meet at the earliest to ensure a smo th and
, clause (a) of Sub-section (2) of Section 8; efficient response.

. (c) : “member” mearis the member of the National _ (8) The National Authority may, invite any member.
. -Executive Committee under Sub-section (2) of the National Executive Committee whenever required, to

. of Section 8; a : assist it in discharge of its functions. — me

[PAGE 3]
(APTN —BvE 3(i)] URE ST USGA: AAT 3

_ ‘ (9) The National Executive Committee shall invite, ' Safrer det (geet) Fram, 1972 8 aes aeard Saar at

" the Secretary or Additional Secretary, as the:case may be, aaa aed; a .
of the National Authority, as a special invitee to attend its © (a) afr @ arse a vat @ Watea
every meeting. ws | arferPreas, 1952 (1952 #158) @ area arg re ATT

10) The National Executive Committee shall forward an .

the minutes of every meeting to the National Authority. Cae, Fafircen soar ate ara fereterftrer) fram, 1957
4, Allowances to be paid to a person associated as an eB sway Fs aan we S we At wt ata Be,
expert with a sub-committee of the National Executive dtre aren atk de S ues a at arate ers (SerhTTT
Commitee-— A rater obo comma arfirendt = cen 8 weg Ted S fen), sare, Paferce
Sub-section (1) of Section 9, shall be paid travelling and daily tava? ara syen wen Satta fats Bar (Et) Fram,
allowances as are admissible to non-officials attending the ,

a eetins of ecmmites setup by the Central Government, 8 1972 & aria sreereht wears Saw wt INT Lt HY

specified in Appendix 2 to Supplementary Rule 190. eedt ara fearaa gars frm: .
[F. No. 30/9/2005-NDM- III(A)) wg aie frees ST UH ae WaT we fora ore z

NAVEEN VERMA, Jt. Secy. at ag avfaa erm

; aT (2) weta wins aT aera at eT 3 FT
ag facet, 27 feraraz, 2006 su-urg (3) & aia usta fee S SHEA FBT
BLar AH, 598(3). SSIs TET, AIT WAT A yfafee fran oe @, was sa Aa wT, TT APIET
afafrem, 2005 (2005 #53) St U5 HST | Taare, aaa de ath thw a ate Ter (EAE
amt (1) 8 are ofa saat see (2) Se) wea S fa) oer de aes a ae A et eTTT
ak we (me) oe yen afar ar vet ee EL afrardt 2, Hat @ aera atk set @ caf
frafafod fran ard &, aety, :— afafraa, 1952 (1952 1 58) @ ata wary 1a ArT

1, Wire are aie urta—(1) Praet er (ard, fate sraR ait area faetenfrent) Fram, 1957
Shira a ana weer (eta wife S aeel et 8 gh aaa SH organ Ma S Alerts Hot aH aT STATE,
aerate att Gar A ae wen wera aia S aaeT st afer Gfawnat, aa Te ST eH VHT
wat ar aera) fram, 2006@ 1, 4, Progard tat ate cater recta wife st

(2) 2 aa Fae Fa St ane at TS AT aaa wey eh, wt-

2, aftarand —(1) #4 fast # ore aa fr deel (am) maraPafira Reenferart ar Rave aes Tere 5 a
@ saat aif a By (a) fret wan saree gre faepa fre Utter

(am) “arfafrad’ a area water orfufra, 2005 fen mae; a . 7

(2005 #7 53) afta 2; (1) weer S wT A ed we Saeed HTT et;

(@) ‘'weaean afafe’ Qo ra7 ats og

GQ) & ave wete wiirecr gra afer (a) ta fret arr Bfere fevered Pav aren @
Taree aisha afta t; ay fern ren? feet Satta wean st Ta 4 Arse
(nm) “aga 3 a3 st se-g (2) WS aadfera 2; aT
Ca) atta usta witec S sea ERT CS) BRET a BETS earhercests aT PrepaeTTEAT
araiféee wedta wrftraneon ar aera siete 2; feet Prafiea fara at Sar S weren a Ieee Fa ATT
(a) ‘ar & afar at are afta 2; & aqerat eat fee Ten a Vege we fe TAT eI
(S) Vameaa!' BTS al oar (3) ® 5, ara eee iP BT HIE AEA TTA
ais usta wifey a sreaat ere TerhatET wie S aera Seo wares Teta MifRET F
o - sme afta 2; — :. gpeger et ga area at aed wemren atee fered Za

(2) sawed shew a, et ge she tact ad oft ter waa ga Trt GWT AT
frat a afoafad vet & fig afefras A oferta @, farrat Get gant Teta wefan S areaet sr FATE
agt aef gin wt afatran F eA: Sta aI at art 2 ;

3, aaa atte dare —(1) wie wire & 6. Riera — sei usta eT S aes HTS
aeeg S BTA am fafoe cafen Frafafon FS feet ae rarraa, Pree, Bey a rT sere SHE Fafa het
RH BT Ta BA S ares feed a walt HT, — dasa fie Tears ae se ae

Cm) ara wees aaa a agate (Rag 7, ereeta rftreerar ater fee wergenTe ate
afeard @f een 8 tert scien), Heng en, area, ager wt Wee fag wa are ATT 7
Fafesrer @feery, aor si, EA am Fedian athe at sare (1) S saelha ae wera APTS NTE

[PAGE 4]
-. ;
4 - THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Parr Il—Sec. 3h
ta waar sal, aT frag, thar val ake vas aa aT - 1952 (58 of 1952), and leave as admissible to a 7
OE nn eee ith at, Cantal Civil Services (Leave) Rules, 1972,
; . ‘entral Civil Services (Leave) Rules, ,
HRNe Set wet * ba 2 but without the facility of leave travel
__ [LF 30/9/2005-treteH. 3(4) J concession :
- a rata oat, aaa Bre Provided that the option once exercised shall
_ New Delhi, the 27th September, 2006 @) A member of the National Authority, who is
G.S.R. 598(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred . designated'as the Vice-Chairperson of thé
-by clauses-(a) and (d) of Sub-section (2) read with National Authority under Sub-section (3) of
Sub-section (1) of Section 75 of the Disaster Management Section 3, shall be entitled to pay and daily ‘
Act,-2005. (53 of 2005), the Central Government hereby ‘allowance, as admissible to a Union Minister
a : s )
makes the following rules, namely : 7 who is a member of the Cabinet, and pension
Short titleand commencement.—(1)Theserules (without dearness relief) and in the case of
may be called the'Disaster Management (Term of Office member who is a retired officer
perenaes of Service of Members of the National accommodation, medical facilities and
A hority and Payment of Allowances to Members of travelling allowance as admissible to a Union
visory Committee) Rules, 2006. . Cabinet Minister in accordance with the
oo (2) They shall come into force on the date of their provisions of the Ministers (Allowances,
publication in the Official Gazette. « Medical Treatment and Other Privileges) Rules,
2. Definitions.— (1) In these rules, unless the context 1957, made under the Salaries and Allowances
othe Toque ons the Dinasier Mamigiment A of Ministers Act, 1952 (58 of 1952).
means € isaster Managemen ct, 4. Disqualifications,— No person shall be a member
2005.(53 of 2005); f the National Authority, who — :
_ (0) “advisory committee” means the advisory ° e Ne on 4 ority, wi ° . . a
committee constituted by the National (@) _ is, oratany time has been, adjudged insolvent;
- : Authority under Sub-section (1) of Section 7; or .
(c) “member” means a member of the’National . (b) is declared to be of unsound mind by a
: Authority nominated by the Chairperson of competent court; or :
the National Authorify under clause (b) of (c) _ becomes incapable of acting as a member, or
Sub-section (2) of Section 3; . (@ _ is, or has been convicted of an offence which,
(@) “section” means a section of the Act; in the opinion of the Central Government,
(e) “Vice-Chairperson” _Means. the Vice- involves moral turpitude.
« Chairperson designated’ by the Chairperson (e) _ is, or has been removed or dismissed from the
of the National Authority under sub-section service of the Government or a body corporate
*@) woot awe 3. . d herein and not owned or controlled by the Government.
ords and expressions used herein and no a ‘
. defined in these rules but defined in the Act shall have the 5. Resignation. Any member of the National
‘ : . . : Authority may resign from the office of member of the
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act. . . a ee :
. . National Authority by giving a notice in writing under his
3. Pay and service conditions (1) A person 4 to that effect to the Chairperson of the National '
nominated as a ‘ntember‘of the National Authority shall : fhe Chaitp
ws : i Authority and such resignation shall take effect from the
exercise his option to chobdse either, — : te : date on which such notice is accepted by the Chairperson
(a) Pay (less: pension in the case of a retired ‘i .
oe of the National Authority. .
officer), dearness allowance, accommodation, .
medical facilities, travelling allowance, leave 6. Vacancies,— Where a vacancy occurs in the office
travel concession as admissible to a Secretary of a member of the National Authority by reason of
to the Government of India and leave as resignation, disqualification, death or otherwise, the
; admissible to a Government servant under the Vacancy may be filled by fresh nomination.
- Central Civil Services (Leave) Rules, 1972; or ‘7, Allowances to be paid to a member of the Advisory
: (b) pay, daily allowance as admissible to a Union Committee constituted by the National Authority,— A
' Minister of State and pension (without member of the Advisory Committee constituted under Sub-
. dearness relief in the case of retired officer), section (1) of Section 7 shalf be paid such travelling
accommodation, medical facilities, travelling allowances, room rent, daily allowances and conveyance
: allowance as admissible to a Union Minister allowance as are admissible to a member of the High Power
: of State in accordance with the provision of Committee as specified in Appendix-2 to Supplementary
a the Ministers (Allowances, Medical Treatment Rule 190, '
; . and Other Privileges) Rules, 1957, made urider [F .No.30/9/2005-NDM. III(A)]
. the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, , NAVEEN VERMA, It. Secy.
. Printed by the Manager, Govt. of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. ‘ ‘