[PAGE 1]
MINISTRY OF : HOME AFFAIRS
(Department of : CENTRAL RESERVE POLICE FORCE)

The Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949.

1* Act No 66 of 1949 dated 28th December, 1949.

In exercise of the powers conferred by the Dominion Legislature,
assent given by the G.G. on the 28th December, 1949 and published as Act LXVI
of 1949 in the Gazette of India Extra-ordinary, part-IV on 30th December 1949,
the Central Government hereby makes the following Act, namely :-

1. Title :
(1) This Act may be called the Central Reserve Police Force Act,
1949.
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and applies to member of the
force, wherever they may be.

2. Definitions :
In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or
context-
(a) “active duty” means the duty to restore and preserve order
in any local area in the event of any disturbance therein :

(b) “close arrest” means confinement within the force or a
detachment of the force or a post quarter-guard building or tent
under charge of a guard;

(c) “the force” means the Central Reserve Police Force;

(d) “member of the force” means a person who has been
appointed to the Force by the Commandant , whether before or
after the commencement of this Act, and in section
1,3,6,7,16,17,18, and 19 includes also a person appointed to the
force by the Central Government whether before or after such
commencement;

(e) “open arrest” means confinement within the precincts of
any barracks, lines or camp for the time being occupied by any part
of the force ;

(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this
Act;

[PAGE 2]
(g) “subordinate officer” means a member of the force of the
rank of Subedar-Major, Subedar, Jemader or Sub-Inspector;

(h) the expressions “assault” , ”criminal force”,
”fraudulently”, ”reason to believe” and “voluntarily causing hurt”
have the meaning assigned to them respectively in the Indian Penal
Code.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary, part-IV as Act LXVI of 1949,
on 30th December, 1949 and updated upto 31.12.1996.

Latest Notification No. And Date Section 8(2) of CRPF Act,1949
of publication amended vide SO-1673
Dated 29.7.2000.

CONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE

Constitution of the Force

3. (1) There shall continue to be an armed force maintained by the
Central Government and called the Central Reserve Police Force.

(2) The Force shall be constituted in such manner, and the
members of the Force shall receive such pay, pension and other
remuneration, as may be prescribed.

Appointment and Powers of Superior Officers

4. (1) The Central Government may appoint to the Force a
Commandant and such other persons as it thinks fit to the Assistant
Commandant and Company Officers.

(2) The Commandant and every other officer so appointed; shall
have and may exercise, such powers and authority as may be provided by
or under this Act.

Enrolment

5. Before a person is appointed to be a member of the force, the
statement contained in the recruiting roll set out in the Schedule shall be
read out and if necessary, explained to him in the presence of an officer
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 4 and shall be signed by such
person in acknowledgement of its having been so read out to him;

[PAGE 3]
Provided that any person who has for a period of six months served
with the force shall on appointment to the force thereafter, be deemed to
be a member of the force notwithstanding that provisions of this section
have not been complied with in his case.

Resignation and withdrawal from the Force

6. No member of the Force shall be at liberty to-

(a) resign his appointment during the term of his engagement,
except before the expiration of the first three months of his service; or

(b) withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his
appointment, without the previous permission in writing of the
Commandant or Assistant Commandant or any other officer authorized by
the Commandant to grant such permission.

GENERAL DUTIES OF MEMBER OF THE FORCE
General Duties of member of the force.
7. (1) It shall be the duty of every member of the Force promptly to
obey and to execute all orders and warrants lawfully issued to him by the
any competent authority, to detect and bring offenders to justice and to
apprehend all persons whom he is legally authorized to apprehend and for
whose apprehend and for sufficient grounds exist.

(2) Every member of the force shall be liable to serve without and
beyond, as well as within, the territory of India.

SUPERINTENDENCE ,CONTROL,AND ADMINISTRATION OF
THE FORCE
Superintendence, Control and Administration of the Force
8. (1) The superintendence of , and control over, the force shall vest
in the Central Government ; and the force shall be administered by the
Central Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of
any rules made there under, through such officers as the Central
Government may from time to time appoint in this behalf.

(2) The headquarters of the force shall be at New Delhi* or at such
other place as may from time to time be specified by the Central
Government.
* amended vide SO 1673 dated 29/7/2K.
(3) While on active duty outside its headquarters, the force shall be
subject to the general control and direction of such authority or officer as
may be prescribed or as may be specially appointed by the Central
Government in this behalf.

[PAGE 4]
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS

More heinous offences.
9. Every member of the force who-

(a) begins, excites, causes or conspires to cause or joins in any
mutiny, or being present at any mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavour
to suppress it, or knowing, or having reason to believe in , the existence of
any mutiny, or of any intention or conspiracy to mutiny or of any
conspiracy against the State does not, without delay, give information
thereof to his superior officer; or

(b) uses, or attempts to use, criminal force to, or commits an
assault on, his superior officer, whether on or off duty, knowing or having
or having reason to believe him to be such; or

(c) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post or guard
which is committed to his charge, or which it is his duty to defend ; or

(d) directly or indirectly holds correspondence with, or assists
or relieves any person in arms against the State or omits to discover
immediately to his superior officer any such correspondence coming to his
knowledge; or
who, while on active duty,-

(e) disobeys the lawful command of his superior officer; or

(f) deserts the Force; or

(g) being a sentry, sleeps upon his post or quits it without
being regularly relieved or without leave; or

(h) leaves his commanding officer, or his post or party , to go
in search of plunder ; or

(i) quits his guard, picquet, party or patrol without being
regularly relieved or without leave; or

(j) uses criminal force to, or commits an assault on, any person
bringing provisions or other necessaries to campo or quarters, of forces a
safeguard or breaks into any house or other place for plunder, or plunders,
destroys or damages property of any kind; or

(k) intentionally causes or spreads a false alarm in action or in
camp, garrison or quarters; or

[PAGE 5]
(l) displays cowardice in the execution of his duty.

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to fourteen years or with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years or with fine which may extend
to three months pay or with fine to that extent in addition to such
sentence of transportation or imprisonment.

Less heinous offences

10. Every member of the force who-

(a) is in a state of intoxication when on, or after having been
warned for, any duty or on parade or on the line of march; or

(b) strikes or attempts to force any sentry; or

(c) being in command of a guard, piquet or patrol, refuses to
receive any prisoner or person or person duly committed to his charge or
without proper authority releases any person or prisoner placed under his
charge or negligently suffers any such prisoner or person to escape; or

(d) being under arrest or in confinement, leaves his arrest or
confinement, before he is set at liberty by lawful authority; or

(e) is grossly in-subordinate or insolent to his superior officer
in the execution of his office ; or

(f) refuses to superintend or assist in the making of any fieldwork or other work of any description ordered to be made either in
quarters or in the field; or

(g) strikes or otherwise ill-uses any member of the force
subordinate to him in rank or position ; or

(h) designedly or through neglect injures or loses or
fraudulently disposes of his arms, clothes, tools, equipments, ammunition
or accountrement or any such articles entrusted to him or belonging to
any other person ; or

(i) malingers or feigns or produces disease or infirmity in
himself, or intentionally delays his cure, or aggravates his disease or
infirmity; or

[PAGE 6]
(j) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for
service , voluntarily causes hurt to himself or any other person; or

(k) does not, when called upon by his superior officer so to do
or upon ceasing to be a member of the force forthwith deliver up, or duly
account for, all or any arms,. Ammunition, stores, accountrements or
other property issued or supplied to him or in his custody or possession as
such member; or

(l) knowingly furnishes a false return or report of the number
or state of any men under his command or charge or of any money, arms
ammunition, clothing, equipments, stores or other property in his charge,
whether belonging to such men or to the Government or to any member of
or any

(m) person attached to the force or who through design or
culpable neglect, omit, or refuses to make or send any return or report of
the matters aforesaid; or

(n) absent himself without leave, or without sufficient cause
overstays leave granted to him: or

(o) is guilty of any act or omission which, though not specified
in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline: or

(p) contravenes any provision of this Act for which no
punishment is expressly provided: or

who, while not on active duty:-

(q) commits any of the offences specified in clauses (e) to (l)
(both inclusive) of section 9.

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine which may extend to three months pay, or with both.

Minor punishments.
11. (1) The Commandant or any other authority or officer as may be
prescribed, may, subject to any rules made under this Act award in lieu of or in
addition to, suspension or dismissal any one or more of the following
punishments to any member of the force whom he considered to be guilty of
disobedience, neglect of duty, or remissness in the discharge of any duty or of
other misconduct in his capacity as a member of the force, that is to say :-

(a) reduction in rank;

[PAGE 7]
(b) fine of any amount not exceeding one month’s pay and
allowances;

(c) confinement to quarters, lines or camp for a term not
exceeding one month;

(d) confinement in the quarter-guard for not more than twenty
eight days with or without punishment drill or extra guard, fatigue or
other duty; and

(e) removal from any office of distinction or special
emolument in the force.

(2) Any punishment specified in clause (c ) or clause (b ) of
sub-section (l) may be awarded by any gazetted officer when in command
of any detachment of the force away from headquarters, provided he is
specially authorised in this behalf by the Commandant.

(3) The Assistant Commandant ,a Company Officer or a
Subordinate Officer , not being below the rank of Subedar or Inspector
commanding a separate detachment or an outpost, or in temporary
command at the headquarters of the force, may, without a formal trial,
award to any member of the force who is for the time being subject to his
authority any one or more of the following punishments for the
commission of any petty offence against discipline which is not otherwise
provided for in this Act or which is not of a sufficiently serous nature to
require prosecution before a Crimnal Court that is to say:-

(a) confinement for not more that seven days in the
quarterguard or such other place as may be considered suitable, with
forfeiture of all pay and allowances during its continuance;

(b) punishment drill, or extra guard, fatigue or other duty, for
not more than thirty days, with or without confinement to quarters, lines
,or camp.

(4) A Jemadar or Sub-Inspector who is temporarily in
command of a detachment or an outpost may in like manner and for the
commission of any like offence award to any member of the force for the
time being subject to his authority any of the punishment specified in
clause (b) of sub-section (3) for not more than fifteen days.

[PAGE 8]
Place of imprisonment and liability to dismissal on imprisonment

12. (1) Every person sentenced under this Act to imprisonment may be
dismissed from the force and shall further be liable to forfeiture of pay,
allowance and any other moneys due to him, as well as of any medals and
decorations received by him.

(2) Every such person shall, if he is so dismissed, be imprisoned in
the prescribed prison, but if he is not also dismissed from the force he may
if the Court of the Commandant so directs, be confined in the
quarterguard or such other place as the court or the Commandant may
consider suitable.

Deduction from pay and allowance

13. The following penal deductions may be made from the pay
and allowances of a member of the force by his Company officer, that is to
say –

(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on
desertion or without leave and for every day of imprisonment awarded by
a Crimnal Court or of confinement awarded under section 11;

(b) all pay and allowances for every day whilst he is in custody
on a charge for an offence of which he is afterwards convicted;

(c) all pay and allowance for every day on which he is in
hospital on account of sickness certified by the medical officer attending
on him at the hospital to have been caused by an offence committed by
him under that Act;

(d) all pay and allowances ordered to be forfeited under
section 11; and

(e) such sum as may be ordered by the Commandant or
Assistant Commandant in order to make good any expenses caused by the
member of the force, or any loss of or damage or destruction done by him
to, any arms, ammunition, equipment, clothing, instruments, or
decorations belonging to the force or to any buildings or property.

[PAGE 9]
Collective fine
14. Whenever any weapon, part of a weapon or ammunitions, forming
part of the equipment of a company or other similar unit of the force is lost
or stolen, the Commandant may , after making such inquiry as he thinks fit
and subject to such rules as may be prescribed, impose a collective fine
upon the subordinate officers and men of such unit, or upon so many of
them as, in his judgment, should be held responsible for such loss or theft.

ARREST

Arrest
15. (1) Any member of the force who commits any offence
specified in section 9 or section 10 may be placed on open or close arrest
by any officer of the force.

(2) Where any subordinate officer orders an arrest under sub
section (l), he shall forthwith or at the earliest opportunity report the arrest
to his company or detachment Commander who shall after investigating
the case order the release or the continued arrest of the member of the
force arrested.

MISCELLANEOUS

Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on member of the force.

16. (1) The Central Government may, by general or special order,
confer or impose upon any member of the force any of the powers or
duties conferred or imposed on a police officer of any class or grade by
any law for the time being in force.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure 1898 (1973) the Central Government may invest the
Commandant or an Assistant Commandant with the powers of a
Magistrate of any class for the purpose of inquiring into or trying any
offence committed by a member of the force and punishable under this
Act or any offence committed by a member of the force against the person
or property of another member;

Provided that-

(i) when the offender is on leave or absent from duty, or

(ii) when the offence is not connected with the offender’s
duties as member of the force, or

[PAGE 10]
(iii) when it is a petty offence, even if connected with the
offender’s duties as member of the force.

the offence may, if the prescribed authority within the limits of whose
jurisdiction the offence has been committed, so directs, be inquired into or
tried by an ordinary Crimnal Court having jurisdiction in the matter.

Protection for acts of members of the Force

17. (1) In any suit or proceeding against any member of the force for
any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant or order of a competent
authority, it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him
under the authority of such warrant or order.

(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrantor
order directing the act, and if it is so proved the member of the Force shall
thereupon be discharged from liability in respect of the act so done by
him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction of the authority which
issued such warrantor order.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, any legal proceeding (whether civil or crimnal) which may
lawfully be brought against any member of the force for anything done or
intended to be d0neunder the powers conferred by, or in pursuance or ,
any provision of this Act or the rules there under, shall be commenced
within three months after the act complained of was committed and not
otherwise, and notice in writing of such proceeding and of th4e cause
thereof shall be given to the defendant or his superior officer at least one
month before the commencement of such proceeding.

Power to make rules.

18. (1) The Central Government may by notification in the official
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following
matters, namely:-

(a) regulating the classes and grades of, and the pay, pension and
other remuneration of, member of the force, and their
conditions of service in the force;

(b) regulating the powers and duties of officers authorized to
exercise any function by or under this Act;

[PAGE 11]
(c) fixing the period of service for members of the force;

(d) regulating the award of minor punishment under section 11 and
providing for appeals from, or the revision of orders under that
section, or the remission of fines imposed under that section,
and the remission of deductions made under section 13;

(e) regulating the several or collective liability of member of the
force in the case of the loss or theft of weapons and
ammunition;

(f) for the disposal of criminal cases arising under this Act and for
specifying the prison in which a person convicted in any such
case may be confined.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made , before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or
in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified from or be of no effect, as the
cases may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that
rule.

(Inserted vide GSR-764 (E) dtd 15.5.86)

Validation of Acts done before commencement Act.

19. Any order made, thing done, or action taken by or in relation to a
member of the force, on or after the 15th day of August, 1947, but before the
commencement of this Act, shall for all purposes be deemed to have been
made, done or taken under this Act, as if this Act were in force on the day on
which such order was made, thing was done or action was taken.

THE SCHEDULE
Recruiting Roll
(See Section 5)

After youhave served in theFore for such period as the Central
Government may prescribe, you mayat anytime when not on active duty,
applyfor discharge, throughthe officer to whom you may be subordinate, to
the Commandant, and you will be granted your discharge after two months

[PAGE 12]
from the date of your application, unless your discharge would cause the
vacancies in the Force to exceed one-tenth of the sanctioned strength in which
case you shall be bound to remain until this objection is waivbed or removed.
But, when on active duty, you shall have no claim to a discharge and you
shall be bound to remain to do your duty until the necessity for retaining you
in the Force ceases when you may make your application in the above
mentioned manner:

Provided that, if you wish to withdraw from the Fore, you may submit
your resignation at any time before the expiration of the first three months of
your service, but, not afterwards until he completion of the period prescribed
as aforesaid: the Commandant may either accept your resignation forthwith or
at the end of three months from the date of its receipt:

Provided, also that the Commandant may, if he thinks fit, allow you to
resign at any time on your giving three months' notice of your wish to do so.

Signature of the member of the Force in acknowledgement of the above
having been read out to him.

Signature for impression of the member's left thumb to be taken in the
presence of the enrolling officer.

Signed in my presence after I had ascertained that the candidate understood
the purport of what he signed.

Commandant
Or other authorised enrolling officer.
Place:………
Date: ………