[PAGE 1]
THE BOMBAY REORGANISATION ACT, 1960

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS

PART I
PRELIMINARY

SECTIONS
1. Short title.
2. Definitions.
PART II
REORGANISATION OF BOMBAY STATE
3. Formation of Gujarat State.
4. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution
5. Saving powers of State Government.

PART III
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES

The Council of States
6. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.
7. Allocation of sitting members.
8. Bye-elections to fill vacancies.
9. Term of office.

The House of the People
10. Representation in the House of the -People.
11. Delimitation of Parliamentary constituencies.
12. Provision as to sitting members. The
Legislative Assemblies

13. Strength of Legislative Assemblies.
14. Delimitation of Assembly constituencies.
15. Allocation of members.
16. Duration of Legislative Assemblies.

17. Speakers and Deputy Speakers.
18. Rules of Procedure,

[PAGE 2]
ii Bombay Reorganisation [ACT. 11
SECTIONS

19. Special provisions in relation to Gujarat Legislative
Assembly.
The Legislative Council
20. Amendment of article 168 of the Constitution.
21. Legislative Council of Maharashtra.
22. Council constituencies.
23. Provision as to certain sitting members.
24. Special provision as to biennial elections.
25. Chaiiinan and Deputy Chairman.
Scheduied Castes and Scheduled Tribes
26. Amendment of the Scheduled Castes Order. 97.
Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order.
PART IV
HIGH COURTS
28. High Court for Gujarat.
29. Judges of Gujarat High Court.
30. Jurisdiction of Gujarat High Court. l.
Power to enrol advocates, etc.

32. Practice and procedure in Gujarat High Court.
33. Custody of seal of Gujarat High Court.
34. Form of writs and other processes.
35. Powers of Judges.

36. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.
37. Transfer of proceedings from Bombay High Court to Gujarat
High Court.

38. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to
Gujarat High Court.
39. Interpretation.
40_ Savings.

41. Permanent Bench of Bombay High Court at
Nagpur. PART V
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE
42. Authorisation of expenditure of Gujarat State.
43. Reports relating to accounts of Bombay State.
44. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Gujarat,
45. Distribution of revenues.

[PAGE 3]
'or 1960] Bombay Reorganisation Ill

PART VI
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

SECTIONS
46. Application of Part.
47. Land and goods.
48. Treasury and bank balances.
49. Arrears of taxes.
50. Right to recover loans and advances.
51. Credits in certain funds.
52. Special Revenue Reserve Fund in Gujarat..
53. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings.
54. Public debt.
55. Floating Debt.
56. Refund of taxes collected in excess.
57. Deposits. etc.
58. Provident fund.
59. Pensions.
60. Contracts.

61. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.
62. Liability as guarantor.
63. Items in suspense.
64. Residuary provision.

65. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.
66. P ow e r of Cen tr a l G over n men t to or d er a lloc a tio n o r
adjustment in certain cases.
67. Certain expenditure to be charged on consolidated Fund

PART VII
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS

68. Provisions as to Bombay State Electricity Board and State
Warehousing Cmporation.
69. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and
supply of electric power and supply of water.
70 Provisions as to Bombay State Financial Corporation.
71 Amendment of Act 64 of 1950.

72. Special provision for Bar Council of Gujarat.

[PAGE 4]
iv Bombay Reorganisation [Act 1.1

SECTIONS

73. Amendment of Act 6 of 1942.

74. General provision as to statutory corporations.

75. Amendment of Act 38 of 1957.

76. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing
road transport permits.
77. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in
certain cases.

78. Special provision as to income-tax.

79. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions.

PART VIII

PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES

80_ Provisions relating to. All-India Services.

81. Provisions relating to other services.

89_ Provisions as to continuance of . officers in same post. .

83- Power of Central Government to give directions..

34. Provisions as to Bombay Public Service Commission.

PART IX

LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

85. Amendment of article 371 of the Constitution.

86. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956

P. Territorial extent of laws

88. Power to adapt laws. 39.

Power to construe laws.

90. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory
functions.

91. Legal Proceedings.

92. Transfer of. pending proceedings. 93_ Right of:

pleaders to practise in certain cases_ 94. Effect of

provisions of the Act inconsistent with other -laws.

[PAGE 5]
-"4 OF 1960] Bombay Reorganisation

SECTIONS

95. Power to remove difficulties.
96. Power to make rules.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE
THE NINTH SCHEDULE
THE TENTH SCHEDULE
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE
THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE

[PAGE 6]
THE BOMBAY REORGANISATION ACT, 1960
-
No. 11 OF 1960

(b) [25th April, 1960]

An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the State of Bombay and for
matters connected therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Eleventh Year of the Republic of
India as

PART I

PRELIMINARY

Short title.
1. This Act may be called the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960.
Definitions.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "appointed day" means the 1st day of May, 1960;

(c) "article" means an article of the Constitution;

(e) "notified order" means an order published in the Official
."parliamentary constituency" have the sume meanings as in the
43 of 1950. Representation of the People Act, 1950;
(d) "law" includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation,
order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other instrument
having, immediately before the appointed day, the force of law
in the whole or in any part of the State of Bombay;
(e) "notified order" means an order published in the Official
Gazette;

(f) "population ratio", in relation to the States of Maharashtra
and Gujarat, means the ratio of 66.31 to 33.69;
226 M. of Law.

[PAGE 7]
2 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
(g) "sitting member", in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of the State of Bombay, means a person
who, immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that
House;

(h) "transferred territory" means the territories which, as
from the appointed day, are the territories of the State of Gujarat;

(i) "treasury" includes a sub-treasury;

(j) any reference to a district, taluka, village or other territorial division of the State of Bombay shall be construed as a
reference to the area comprised within that territorial division as
recognised for land revenue ptrposes on the 1st day of December,
1959.

PART II

REORGANISATION OF BOMBAY STATE

Formation 3. (I) As from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new Stateof Gujarat
 S to be known as the State of Gujarat comprising the following territories
of the State of Bombay, namely:—

(a) Banaskantha, Mehsana, Sabarkantha, Ahmedabad,
Kaira, Panch-mahals, Baroda, Broach, Surat, Pangs, Amreli,
Surendra-nagar, Rajkot, Jamnagar, Junagadh, Bhavnagar and
Kutch districts; and

(b) the villages in Umbergaon taluka of Thana district, the
villages in Nawapur and Nandurbar talukas of West Khandesh
district and the villages in Akitalkuwa and Taloda talukas of West
Khandesh district, respectively specified in Parts I, II and III of the
First Schedule;

and thereupon, the said territories shall cease to form part of theState
of Bombay, and the residuary State of Bombay shall be known as the
State of Maharashtra.

(2) The villages in Umbergaon taluka specified in Part I of the First
Schedule shall form a separate taluka of the same name and be
included in Surat district, and the remaining villages in the said taluka
shall be included in, and form part of, Dahanu taluka of Thana
district; and the villages specified in Parts II and III of the First
Schedule shall respectively be included in, and form part of, Songadh
taluka of Surat district and Sagbara taluka of Broach district.

[PAGE 8]
or 1960] Bombay Reorganisation -. 3
4. As from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the ConSti- Amendment
rution, under the heading "1. THE STATES",— of the first
Scheduleto

(a) for entry 4, the following entry shall be
namely:—
"4. Gujarat The territories referred to in subsection (1) of section 3 of the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960.";

(b) after entry 7, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—

"3. Maharashtra The territories specified in subsection (1) of section 8 of the
States Reorganisation Act, 1956,
but excluding the territories referred to in sub-section (1) of section
3 of the Bombay Reorganisation
Act, 1960."; and

(c) entries 8 to 14 shall be renumbered as entries 9 to 15
respectively.

5. Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be deemed
Saving Etogwteeroovf. to affect the power of
the State Government to alter, after the
appointed day, the name, extent or boundaries of any district, taluka
ernment. or villuge in the State.

PART III

REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES
The Council of ,States
6. As from the appointed day, there shall be allotted 19 seats to Andfindment
9Fthe State of Maharashtra, and 11 seats to
the State of Gujarat, in the oughSche
. tion.
chileConsto thetitu-Council of States, and in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, inthe Table,—
(a) for entry 4, the following entry shall be substituted,
namely:—

"4. Gujarat .. 11";

(b) after entry 7, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—

"8. Maharashtra 19;"

[PAGE 9]
Bombay Reorganisation [ACT ii
(C) entries 8 to 18 shall be renumbered as entries 9 to 19
respectively; and
(d) for the figures "221" the figures "224" shall be substituted.

Allocation of 7. (1) The twelve sitting members of the Council of States represitting senting the State of Bombay, whose names are specified in Part I of
members. the Second Schedule, and such six of the nine sitting members elected to
represent that State at the biennial elections held for the purpose of
filling the vacancies existing on the 3rd day of April, 1960, as the
Chairman of the Council of States shall by order specify shall, as from
the appointed day, be deemed to have been duly elected to fill eighteen
of the nineteen seats allotted to the State of Maharashtra.
(2) The five sitting members of the Council of States representing
the State of Bombay, whose names are specified in Part II of the
Second Schedule, and the remaining three of the nine members
elected at the said biennial elections shall, as from the appointed day,
be deemed to have been duly elected to fill eight of the eleven seats
allotted to the State of Gujarat.

Bye_eiections 8. As soon as may be after the appointed day, bye-elections shall
to fill "cam- be held to fill the edditional seats allotted to the States of Maha
rashtra and Gujarat as well as the existing casual vacancy in the
seats allotted to the State of Gujarat.

Term of 9. (/) The term of office of the sitting members and of the memoffice.
ber chosen to fill the casual vacancy shall remain unaltered.

(2) The term of office of the member elected to fill the one additional seat llotted to the State of MaharaShtra shall expire on the
2nd day of April, 1966.
(3) Out of the two members elected to fill the two additional
seats allotted to the State of Gujarat, the term of office of that
member who, at the counting of votes, is last declared elected, or if
an equality of votes is found to exist, the term of office of such one
of them as the returning officer shall decide 'by lot, shall expire on
the 2nd dtay of April, 1964 and the term of office of the other
member -shall expire op the 2nd day of April, 1966.
The House of the People
Representa. 10. As from the appointed day, there shall be allotted 44 seats todon in the
House of the the State of Maharashtra, and 22 seats to the State of Gujarat, in
People. the House of the People, and in the First Schedule to the
Representation of the People Act, 1950—
43 of1950.
(a) fo.r entry 4, the following entry shall be substituted,
namely:—
"4. Gujarat 22";

[PAGE 10]
or 19601 Bombay Reorgo nisation 5
(b) after entry 7, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"8. Maharashtra 44"; and
(c) entries 3 to 22 shall be renumbered as entries 9 to 23
respectively.
11. As from the appointed day, the First Schedule to the Delimita- Delimitation of Parliaton of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, shall mentary
stand amended as directed in the Third Schedule to this Act. Constituen- cies
'virion
12. Every sitting member of the House of the People representing as a constituency which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the to sitting mbers.
provisions of section 11, stands allotted, with or without alterame
tion of boundaries, to the State of Maharashtra or to the State of
Gujarat, shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the
People by that constituency as so allotted.

The Legislative Assemblies
13. As from the appointed day, the total number of seats to be strength at
filled by persons chosen by direct election in the Legislative Assem- Legislative
blies of Maharashtra and Gujarat shall be 264 and 132 respectively,Assemblies,
and in the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act,
43 of 1950- 1950—
(a) for entry 4, the following entry shall be substituted,
namely:—
4. Gujarat 132";
(b) after entry 7, the following entry shall be inserted,
namely:—
"3. Maharashtra .. 264"; and
(c) entries 8 to 13 shall be renumbered as entries 9 to 14
respectively.
14, As from the appointed day, the Second Schedule to.the Delimi- Delimitation
tation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, of assembly constimenshall stand amended as directed in the Fourth Schedule to this Act. cies,

15. (1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Born- Allocation of
bay representing a constituency which on the eppointed day by members.
virtue of the provisions of section 14 stands transferred, whether with
or without alteration of boundaries, to the State of Gujarat shall, as
from that day, cease to be a member of the Legislative Assembly of
Bombay and shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative
Assembly of Gujarat by that constituency as so transferred.
(2) All other sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of
Bombay shall become members of the Legislative Assembly of

[PAGE 11]
6 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
Maharashtra and lany such sitting member representing a
constituency the extent or the name and extent of which are
altered by virtue of the provisions of section 14 shall be deemed to
have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra by
that constituency as so altered.

(3) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of Bombay
nominated to that Assembly under article 333 to represent the
Anglo-Indian community shall be deemed to have been nominated
to represent the said community in the Legislative Assembly of
Maharashtra under that cuticle.
Duration of 16. The period of five years referred to in clause (1) of article 172
Legislative of the Constitution shall, in the case. of the Legislative AssemblyAssemblies.
of Maharashtra or Gujarat, be deemed to have commenced on the
date on which it actually commenced in the case of the Legislative
Assembly of Bombay.
Speakers and -(1) The persons who immediately before the appointed day- -Deputy -
Speakers. are r_the_Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of
Bombay - shall be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of
the Legislative Assembly of Maharashtra.
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative
Assembly of Gujarat shall choose two members of that Assembly to
be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and. until they
are so chosen, the duties of the office of Speaker shall be performed
by such member of the Assembly as the Governor may appoint for
the purpose.

Rules of 18. The rules as to procedure and conduct of business in forceprocedure.
immediately before the appointed day with respect to the Legislative
Assembly of Bombay shall, until rules are made under clause (1) of
article 208, have effect in relation to the Legislative Assembly of
Maharashtra or of Gujarat, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof.
visions in
Special. pro- 19. MI The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly relation to of Gujarat to be filled by persons chosen by direct election on theGujarat Le- expiration of the duration of that Assembly under section 16 or on gislative As-

sembly. its dissolution shall be increased from 132 to 154; and accordingly,
as from the date of such expiration or dissolution, in the Second
Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950, in entry 4, 43 of 1950'
for the figures "132", the figures "154" shall be substituted.
(2) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of sub-.
section (/), the Election Commission shall determine in the manner
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the scheduled
castes and the scheduled tribes of the State in the Legislative

[PAGE 12]
OF 19601 Bombay Reorganisation 7
Assembly, having regard to the relevant provisions of the Constitution;

(b) the assembly constituencies into which the State shall
be divided, the extent of, and the number of seats to be allotted
to, each such constituency, and the number of seats, if any, to
be reserved for the scheduled castes or the scheduled tribes of
the State in each such constituency; and

(c) the adjustments in the boundaries and description of
the extent of the parliamentary constituencies in the State that
may be necessary or expedient.

( 3 ) I n d e t e r mi n i n g t h e ma t t e r s r e f er r e d t o i n c l a u s e s ( b ) a n d ( c ) o f
s u b - s e c t io n ( 2 ) , t h e E l e c t i o n Co m mi s s i o n s h a l l h av e r e g ar d to t h e
p r o v i s io n s c o n t a in ed in c l a u s e s ( a ) to ( e ) o f s u b - s e c t i o n (2 ) S i o f 1 9 5 2 .
o f s e c t i o n 8 o f th e D e l i mi t a t i o n C o m mi s s i o n A c t, 1 9 5 2 .

(4) For the purpose of assisting the Election Commission in the
performance of its functions under sub-section (2), the Commission
shall associate with itself such five persons as the Central Government shall by order specify, being persons who are members either
of the Legislative Assembly of the State or of the House of the
People representing the State:

. Provided that none of the said associate members shall have a
right to vote or to sign any decision of the Election Commission.
(5) The Election Commission shall—
(a) publish its proposals in regard to matters mentioned
in sub-section (2) in the Official Gazette of the State together
with a notice specifying the date on or after which the proposals will be further considered by it;
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may
have been received by it before the date so specified, arid for
 the purpose of such consideration, bold one or more public
sittings at such place or places as it thinks fit;
(c) make an order revising to such extent as may be necessary or expedient the Schedules to the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1956, in so far as
they relate to the State; and
(d) send authenticated copies of the order to the Central
Government and to the State Government.

(6) As soon as may be after the said order is received by the
Central Government or the State Government, it shall be laid
before the House of the People or, as the case may be, the Legislative Assembly of the State.

[PAGE 13]
8 Bombay Reorganisation [Aur 11
(7) An order made by the Election Commission under this section
shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in
any court.

The Legislative Council

Amendment 20. As from the appointed day, in article 168 of the Constitution,
of article 168
of the Cons- in sub-clause (a) of clause (1) , the word "Bombay" shall be omitted,
titution. and after the word "Madras", the word "Maharashtra" shall be
inserted.

Legislative 21. As from the appointed day, there shall be 78 seats in the
Council of Legislative Council of Maharashtra, and in the Third Schedule toMaharashtra. 43 f
the Representation of the People Act, 1950,— o
1950.
(a) the entry No. 3 relating to Bombay shall be omitted and
the existing entries 4 and 5 shall be renumbered as entries 3 and
4 respectively;
(b) after the entry relating to Madras, the following entry
shall be inserted, namely:—
"5. Maharashtra... 78 22 7 7 30 12."Council constituencies. 22. As from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Council
Constituencies (Bombay) Order, 1951- shall stand amended as
di t d i th Fifth S h d l
Provision as 23. (1) On the appointed day—
to certain
sitting members. (a) the sitting members of the Legislative Council of
Bombay specified in the Sixth Schedule shall cease to be
members of that Council; and.
(h) all other sitting members of that Council shall become
members of the Legislative Council of Maharashtra and any
such sitting member representing a council constituency the
extent of which is altered by virtue of the provisions of section
22 shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative
Council of Maharashtra by that constituency as so altered.
(2) The term of office of the members referred to in clause (h) of subsection (1) shall remain unaltered.
Special pro- 24. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 16 of
vision as to
biennial the Representation of the People Act, 1951, no notification under 43 of 1951.
elections, that seotion shall be published before the appointed day for holding
biennial elections to fill the seats of members of the Legislative Council
of Bombay, retiring on the expiration of their term of office on the 24th
day of April, 1960.
(2) The term of office of the members of the said Council elected to
fill the vacancies at the said biennial elections shall expire on the 24th
day of April, 1966,

[PAGE 14]
or 1060] Bombay Reorganisation 9
25. (1) The person who immediately before the appointed day is Chairman
and Deputy
the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of Bombay shall Chairman.
be the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of Mkaharashtra.

(2) As soon as may be after the completion of the biennial elections referred to in section 24, the Legislative Council of Maharashtra shall choose one of its members to be the Chairman thereof.

Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes

26. As from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled oAfmthenedinschenee
Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Seventh duicd Castes
Schedule. Order.
27. As from the appointed day, the Constitution (Scheduled Ainendsmit as
Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended directed in the Eighth dooltehde Tribe;
Schedule. Order:

PART IV

HIGH COURTS

28, ID As from the appointed day, there shall be a separate High Court
High Court for the State of Gujarat (hereinafter referred to as "the for
Gujarat. High Court of Gujarat") and the High Court of Bombay shall become the High Court for the State of Maharashtra (hereinafter referred to as the High Court at Bombay).
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Gujarat shall be at
such place as the President may, by notified order, appoint.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the
Judges and division courts of the High Court of Gujarat may sit at
such other place or places in the State of Gujarat other than its
principal seat as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the
Governor of Gujarat, appoint.

29. (1) Such of the Judges of the High Court of Bombay holding Judges of
office immediately before the appointed day as may be determined / G itlgti rgolut. by
the President shall on that day cease to be Judges of the High
Court at Bombay and become Judges of the High Court of Gujarat.

(2) The persons who by virtue of sub-section (1) become Judges
of the High Court of Gujarat shall, except in the case where any such
person is appointed to be the Chief Justice of that High Court, rank
in that Court according to the priority of their respective
appointments as Judges of the High Court me Bombay.

30 The High Court of Gujarat shall have in respect of any part Jurisdiction
of the territories included in the State of Gujarat, all such oifGighujCaroat
F t

[PAGE 15]
Id Bombay Reorganisation FACT 11
junsdiction, powers and authority as, under the law in force
immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of that
part of the said territories by the High Court of Bombay.

Power to 31. (1) The High Court of Gujarat shall have the like powers to
enrol advo- approve, admit, enrol, remove and suspend advocates and attorneys,cates, etc.
and to make rules with respect to advocates and attorneys, as are,
under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, exercisable by the High Court of Bombay.

(2) The right of audience in the High Court of Gujarat shall be
regulated in accordance with the like principles as, immediately
before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of
audience in the High Court of Bombay:

Provided that, subject to any rule made or direction given by the
High Court of Gujarat in exercise of the powers conferred by this
section, any person who immediately before the appointed day is
an advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to act, in
the High Court of Bombay shall be recognised as an advocate or an
attorney entitled to practise or to act, as the case may be, in the
High Court of Gujarat.

Practice and 32. Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procein Gujarat
High court. dure in the High Court of Bombay shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat, and accordingly, the High Court of Gujarat shall have all such powers to make
rules and orders with respect to practice end procedure as are immediately before the appointed day exercisable by the High court of
Bombay:
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately
before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the
High Court of Bombay shall, until varied or revoked by rules or orders
made by the High Court of Gujarat, apply with the necessary
modifications in relation to practice and procedure in the High Court of
Gujarat as if made by that Court.

Custody of 33. The law in force immediately before the appointed day with
seal of Guja- respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Bombay shall, rat
High
Court. with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody
of the seal of the High Court of Gujarat.
34. The law in force immediately before the appointed day withForm of
writs and respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or
other pro- awarded by the High Court of Bombay shall, with the necessarycessesmodifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Gujarat.

[PAGE 16]
OF 1960] Bombay Reorganisation IT
35. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relat-
Powers of ing to the powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division
J u dg e s' courts of the High Court of Bombay and with respect to all matters
ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary
modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat.

36. The law in force immediately before the appointed day relat_ Procedure as to appeals
ing to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Bombay to supreme
and the Judges and division courts thereof shall, with the necessary Court
modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of Gujarat.

37. (1) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court at p T r r o a c n e s e r dici e
Bombay shall, as from the appointed clay, have no jurisdiction in from Bornrespect of the transferred territory. bay High
Court to Gui
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Bombay High
haraCourt.
immediately before the appointed day as are certified, whether
before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court,
having regard to the place of accrual of the cause of action and other
circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be heard and
decided by the High Court of Gujarat shall, as soon as may be after
such certification, be transferred to the High Court of Gujarat.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (I) and
(2) of this section or in section 30, but save as hereinafter provided,
the High Court at Bombay shall have, and the High Court of Gujarat
shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals,
applications for leave io appeal to the Supreme Court, applications
for review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek
any relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court of
Bombay before the appointed day:

Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained
by the High Court at Bombay, it appears to the Chief Justice of that
High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of
Gujarat, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such
proceedings shall thereupon be transferred accordingly.

(4) Any order made by the High Court of Bombay—

(a) before the appointed day, in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Gujarat by virtue of sub-section
(2), or

(b), in any proceedings with respect to which the High
Court at Bombay retains jurisdiction by virtue of sub-section
(3),

[PAGE 17]
1 2 [ A C T 1 1
Bombay Reorganisation
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High
Court at Bombay, but also as an order made by the High Court of
Gujarat.
Right to 38. Any person, who, immediately before the appointed day, is appear or
an advocate entitled to practise, or an attorney entitled to act, in
t o a e t i n
proceedirgs the High Court of Bombay and was authorised to appear or to act
transferred .
to Gujarat in any proceedings transferred from that High Court to the High
High Court. Court of Gujarat under section 37, shall have the right to appear or
to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Gujarat in relation
to those proceedings.
 Interprets. (a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court
tion. until that court has disposed of all issues between the parties.
including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of
the proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave
_ z. _to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs;
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division court thereof, and references
to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as
including references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or
made by that court or Judge.

Savings. 40. Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High
Court of Gujarat of any provisions of the Constitution, and this Part
shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made on or
after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any
egislature or other authority having power to make
h i i 41. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 61 of the States
organisation Act, 1956, such Judges of the High Court at Bombay, 37 of 1956.
mg not less than three in number, as the Chief Justice may from
e to time nominate, shall sit at Nag,pur in order to exercise the
jurisdiction and power for the time being vested in that High Court
in respect of cases arising in the districts of Buldana, Akola, Amravati. Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur, Bhandara. Chanda and Rajura :
Provieled that the Chief Justice may, in his discretion, ordei
that any case arising in any such district shall be heard at Bombay.

P A R T V

AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE

Authorisa- 42. The Governor of Bombay may, at any time before the appoint - don ofex- pen
dittire of ed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of
Gujarat the State of Gujarat as he deems necessary for a period of not more
State.

[PAGE 18]
or 196011 Bombay Reorganisation 13
than six months beginning- with the appointed day pending the
sanction of such expenditure by the Legislature of the State of
Gujarat:

Provided that the Governor of Gujarat may, after the appointed
day, authorise such further expenditure as he deems necessary from
the Consolidated Fund of the State of Gujarat for any period not
extending beyond the said period of six months.

43. (1) The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of Rtports
India referred to in clause (2) of article 151 relating to the accounts ar ec tcaotui ot of
of the State of Bombay in respect of any period prior to the B o m b a y
State.
appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each of the
States of Maharashtra and Gujarat who shall cause them to be
laid before the Legislature of the State.

(2) The President may by order—
(a) declare any • expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of Bombay on any service in respect of any period
prior to the appointed day during the financial year 1960-61 or
in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount
granted for that service and for that year as disclosed in the
reports referred to in -sub-section (1) to have been duly autho-
 rised, and
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising
out of the said reports.
44. The allowances and privileges of the Governor of GujaratA i. II
owances
shall;- until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law an i g y. .
, under clause , (3), of arti clep 158, be such as the President may, by Governor of I lieges of
order, determine. Gujarat.

45. (1) Section 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Distribution
55 of 1957- Act, 1957, sections 3 and 5 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway of revenues.
57 Of 1957. Passenger Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957, section 4 of, and the Second
Schedule to, the Additional Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Im-
5,3 of 1957. portance) Act, 1957. and paragraph 3 of the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues) No. 2 Order, 1957, shall have effect subject to
such modifications as are specified in the Ninth Schedule.

(2) The total amount payable to the State of Maharashtra under
the enactments and Order referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of
the part of the financial year 1960-61 beginning with the appointed
day and in respect of the financial year 1961-62 shall he reduced by
a sum of 602 lakhs of rupees and 614 lakhs of :rupees, respectively
and the total amount payable to the State of Gujarat, under those
enactments and Order in. respect of each of those periods shall be
correspondingly increased.

[PAGE 19]
14 Bombay Reorganisation. [ACT 11 -
PART V1

APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

Application 46. The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the
of Part. apportionment of the assets and liabilities of the State of Bombay
immediately before the appointed day.
Land and 47. (1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all
goods. stores, articles and other goods belonging to the State of Bombay
shall,—
(a) if within the transferred territory, pads to the State of
Gujarat; or
(b) in any other case, remain the property of the State of
Maharashtra:
Provided that where the Central Government is of opinion that
any goods or class of goods should be distributed otherwise than
according to the situation of the goods, the Central Government
may issue such directions as it thinks fit for a just' and equitable
distribution of the goods and the goods shall remain the property
of the State of Maharashtra or, as the case may be, pass to the
State of Gujarat, accordingly-
(2) Any such stores of the State of Bombay as are referred to in
the Tenth Schedule shall be divided between the States of
Maharashtra and Gujarat in the manner specified therein.
(3) in this section, the expression "land" includes immovable
property of .every kind and any rights in or over such property, and
the expression "goods" does not include coins, bank notes and currency notes.
Treasury 48. The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the State
and bank
balances. of Bombay and the credit balances of that State with the Reserve
Bank of India, the State Bank of India and the State Bank of Saurashtra immediately baf ore the appointed day shell be divided bet-.
ween the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the
population ratio:

Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be .no
transfer of cash balances from any treasury to any other treasury and
the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the credit balances of
the two States in the books of the Reserve Bank ofIndia on the
appointed day:
Provided further that if the State of Gujarat has no account on
the appointed daywith the Reserve Bank of India, the adjustment
shall be made in such manner as the Central Government may, by
order, direct.

[PAGE 20]
Or 1960 Bombay Reorganisation

49. The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property,
Arrears al including arrears of land revenue, shall belong to the State in
which t a x e s" the property is situated, and the right to recover arrears of
any other tax or duty shall belong to the State in whose territories the
place of assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed
day:

P r o v i d e d t h a t a n y s u m r e c o v e r e d a f t e r t h e a p p o i n t e d c l a y i n r e s p e c t
o f a n y a r r e a r s o f t a x a c c r u i n g d u r i n g t h e p e r i o d b e t w e e n t h e 1 s t d a y
o f J a n u a r y , 1 9 6 0 , a n d t h e 3 0 t h d a y o f A p r i l , 1 9 6 0 ( b o t h 7 4 o f 1 9 5 6 ,
d a y s i n c l u s i v e ) u n d e r t h e C e n t r a l S a l e s T a x A c t , 1 9 5 6 , o r t h e
Born. Act LI Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, shall, after deducting the cost of of1959.
collection thereof, be divided between the States of Maharashtra
and Gujarat according to the population ratio.

50. (/) The right of the State of Bombay to recover any loans Right to
or advances made before the appointed day to any local body, arnedcover loans
advasociety, agriculturist or other person in an area within that State flees.
shall belong to the Statein which that area is included on that day.

(2) The right of the State of Bombay to recover any loans or
advances made before the appointed day to any person or institution outside that State shall belong to the State of Maharashtra:

Provided that any sum recoverc,l in respect of any such loan or
advance shall be divided between the States of Maharashtra and
Gujarat according to the population ratio.

51. (I) Out of the investments of the State of Bombay made Credits i s
before the appointed day in the cash balance investment account ii er ti tSs in
of the State, such securities of the value of ten crores of rupees, as
the Central Government may by order specify, shall pass to the
State of Gujarat in connection with the construction of a capital for
that State; and the remaining investments in the said account shall
be divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio.

(2) The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before
the appointed day in the State Famine Relief Fund, the State Road
Fund, the Fund for Development Schemes, the Insurance Fund, the
Bombay State Milk Fund, the Securities Adjustment Reserve Fund
and any other general fund and the sums at the credit of that State
in the Central Road Fund shall be divided between the States of
Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio.

[PAGE 21]
t6 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT. 11
(3) The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before
the appointed day in the Dangs District Reserve Fund, the Port
Reserve Fund, the Port Development Fund and the Anand Institute
Fund shall pass to the State of Gujarat and the investments in any
other special fund the objects of which are confined to a loctal area
shall belong to the State in which that area is included on the
appointed day.
(4) The investments of the State of Bombay immediately before
the appointed day in any private commercial or industrial undertaking, in so .far as such investments have not been made or are
deemed not to have been made from the cash balance investment
account, shall pass to the State in which the principal seat of business of the undertaking is located.
(5) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act,
State Act or Provincial Act for the State of Bombay or any part
thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part IL become an inter-
State body corporate, the investments in, or loans or advances to,
any such body corporate by the State of Bombay made before the
appointed day shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by or
under this Act, be divided between the States of Maharashtra and
Gujarat in the same proportion in which the assets of the body corporate are divided under the provisions of Part VII.
52. (1) Out of the investments in the cash balance investmentSpecial
Revenue account which remain with the State of Maharashtra after giving
Reserve effect to the provisions of section 51, such securities of the value ofFund in
Gujarat. 1,420 lakhs of rupees as the Central Government may by order specify shall stand transferred to the State of Gujarat.
(2) There shall be constituted in the State of Gujarat a Fund to
be called the Special Revenue Reserve Fund consisting of the securities transferred to that State under sub-section (/) and such other
securities belonging to the State of Gujarat of the value of 1,419
lakhs of rupees as the Central Government may by order specify.
(3) From and out of the fund constituted under sub-section (2),
there shall be transferred as receipts in the revenue account of the
State of Gujarat in each of the financial years specified in column 1
of the following Table a sum set out against that year in column 2
thereof, and in the financial year 1969-70, the balance, if
any, remaining in that fund:—
TABLE

Financial year Amount in lakhs
of rupees.
(1) (2)
1962-63 612
1963-64 585

[PAGE 22]
OF 1960] Bombay Reorganisation 17
TABLE—contd.
Financial year Amount in iakhs of
rupees.
(1) (2)
1964-65 561
1965-66 526
1966-67 433
1967-68 340
1968-69 209

53. (1) The assets and liabilities relating to any commercial or irbststianescloi
industrial undertaking of the State of Bombay shall pass to the State under-
State in which the undertaking is located. takings.

(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the State
of Bombay for any such commercial or industrial undertaking, the
securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall
pass to the State in which the undertaking is located.

51. (1) The public debt of the State of Bombay attributable to Public
debt. loans raised by the issue of Government securities and outstanding
with the public immediately before the appointed day shall, as from that
day, be the debt of the State of Maharashtra:
Provided that—
(a) the State of Gujarat shall be liable to pay to the State
of Maharashtra its share of the sums due from time to time for
the servicing and repayment of the debt; and
(b) for the purpose of determining the said share, the
debt shall be deemed to be divided between the States of Maharashtra, and Gujarat as if it were a debt referred to in subsection (?) or sub-section (3), as the case may be.
(2) The public debt of the State of Bombay attributable to loans
taken from the Central Government, the National Co-operative
Development and Warehousing Board or the Khadi and Village
Industries Commission or from any other source for the express
Purpose of re-lending the same to a specific institution and outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall,—
(o') if re-lent to any local body, body corporate or other
institution in any local area, he the debt of the State in which
the local area is included on the appointed day; or
(b) if re-lent to the Bombay State Electricity Board. the
Bombay State Road Transport Corporation, or the Bombay
Housing Board or any other institution which becomes an inter-
State institution on the appointed day, be divided between the
22—M of Law

[PAGE 23]
18 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the same proportion in
which the assets of such body corporate or institution are
divided under the provisions of Part VII.

(3) The remaining public debt of the State of Bombay. attributable to loans taken from the Central Government, the Reserve
Bank of India or any other body corporate and outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall be divided between the States
of Maharashtra and Gujarat in proportion to the total expenditure on
all capital works and other capital outlays incurred or deemed to
have been incurred up to the appointed day in the territories
included respectively in each of those States:

Provided that for the purposes of such division, only the expenditure on assets for which capital accounts have been kept shall be
taken into account.

Explanation.—Where any expenditure on capital works or other
capital outlays cannot be allocated between the territories included
in the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat, such expenditure shall,
for the purposes of this sub-section, be deemed to have been incurred in those territories according to the population ratio.

14) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained
by the State of Bombay for repayment of any loan raised by it, the
securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall
be divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the
same proportion in which the total public debt is divided between
the two States under this section.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the fund in the
public account of the State of Bombay known as the Debt
Redemption and Avoidance Fund sball be deemed to be a sinking
fund.

(5) The share of the State of Gujarat in the liability on account
of public debt apportioned under sub-section (3) shall be reduced
by 1,419 lakhs of rupees and the share of the State of Maharashtra
in such liability shall be correspondingly increased.

(6) In this section, the expression "Government security" means
a security created and issued by a State Government for the purpose
of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified in, or
prescribed under, clause (2) of section 2 of the Public Debt
01-1944, Act, 1944.

[PAGE 24]
or. 19601 Bombay Reorganisation to
55. (I) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any Float
floating debt of a Merged State shall be the liability of the State in Debt'
whose territories the area of the Merged State is included on the
appointed day.

(2) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any other
floating loan to provide short-term finance to any commercial
undertaking shall be the liability of the State in whose territories the
undertaking is located.

56. The liability of the State of Bombay to refund any tax or Refund of
duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall Laixfis,
elleescs!" be the liability of the State in which the property is situated, and
the liability of the State of Bombay to refund any other tax or duty
collected in excess shall be the liability of the State in whose territories
the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included:

Provided that the liability to refund any amount after the
appointed day on account of any excess collected in respect oi any
tax accruing during the period between the 1st day of January, 1960,
and the 30th day of April, 1960 (both days inclusive) under the
74 of 1956. Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 or the Bombay Sales Tax Act, 1959, shall
Born. Act be shared between the two States of Maharashtra and Gujarat LIof 1959.
according to the population ratio.

57.. (1) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any Deposits
civil deposit or local fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, etc.
be the liability of the State in whose area the deposit has been made.

(2) The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of any charitable or other endowment shall, as from the appointed day, be the
liability of the State in whose area the institution entitled to the
benefit of the endowment is located or of the State to which the
objects of the endowment, under the terms thereof, are confined.

58. The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of the proprovident vident fund account of a Government servant in service on the
fu"c. appointed day shall, as from that day, be the liability of the State to
which that Government servant is permanently allotted.

59. The liability of the State of Bombay in respect of pensions Pensions.
shall pass to, or be apportioned between, the States of Maharashtra and
Gujarat in accordance with the provisions contained in the Eleventh
Schedule.

[PAGE 25]
20 Bomb ay Reorganisation [ACT 11
Contracts. 60. (1) Where, before the appointed day, the State of Bombay
thas made any contract in the exercise of its executive power for
any purposes of the State, that contract shall be deemed to have
been made in the exercise of the executive power,—

(a) if such purposes are, as from that day, exclusively
purposes of either the State of Maharashtra or the State of
Gujarat, of that State; and

(b) in any other case, of the State of Maharashtra;

and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue,
under any such contract shall, to the extent to which they would
have been rights or liabilities of the State of Bombay, be rights or
liabilities of the State of Maharashtra or the State of Gujarat, as
the case may be:

Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause (b), the
initial allocation of rights and liabilities made by this sub-section
shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon
between the State of Maharashtra and the State of Gujarat or, in
default of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order
direct.

(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to
be included in the liabilities which have accrued or may accrue
under any contract—

(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any
court or other tribunal in proceedings relating to the contract;
and
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in
connection with any such proceedings.

(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions
of this Part relating to the apportionment of liabilities in respect of
loans, guarantees and other financial obligations; and bank balances
and securities shall, notwithstanding that they partake of the nature
of contractual rights, be dealt with under those provisions.
Liability

in 61. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of
respect of Bombay is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong
actionable
Wrong. other than breach of contract, that liability shall,—
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories
which, as from that day, are the territories of the State of
Maharashtra or the State of Gujarat be a liability of that State:
and

[PAGE 26]
or 1960] 13ombay heorganisatititt

(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of
Maharashtra, but subject to such financial adjustment as may
be agreed upon between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat
or, in default of such agreement, as the Central Government
may by order direct.

62. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the State of
Liability Bombay is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a
registered cooperative society or other person, that liability shall,—
(a) if the area of operations of such society or person is
limited to the territories which, as from that day, are the territories of the State of Maharashtra or of the State of Gujarat, be
a liability of that State; and

(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State
of Maharashtra, subject to such financial adjustment as may be
agreed upon between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat or,
in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may
by order direct.

63. If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset Items in
or liability of the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisuspense.sions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance with that provision.

64. The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the State of
R e sidu ary Bombay not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part
shall provisio1. pass to the State of Maharashtra in the first instance,
subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the
States of Maharashtra and Gujarat before the 1st day of April, 1961 or,
in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may by order
direct.

65. Where the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat agree that the Apportionbenefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be inaseseatl, o f o r
apportioned between them in a manner other than that provided liabilities by
for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, then, notwithstanding agreement.
anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or
liability shall be apportioned in the manner agreed upon.

66. Where, by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any power of
of the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat becomes entitled to any Ce ntr a l
Government
property or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liabi- to order
lity, and the Central Government, on a reference made within a allocation
intor
period of three years from the appointed day by either of the States, in certain
is of opinion that it is just and equitable that that property or those cases'

[PAGE 27]
24 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under
sub-section (1) in respect of the Corporation shall include a direction that the said Act, in its application to the Corporation, shall
have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be
specified in the direction.

(3) A general meeting of the Corporation shall be convened, in
accordance with the rules to be made in this behalf by the Central
Government, by the Board thereof before the 31st day of July. 1960,
or within such further time -as the Central Government may allow,
for the consideration of a scheme- for the reconstitution or
reorganisation or dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation, including proposals regarding the formation of new corporations, and the transfer thereto of the assets, rights and liabilities
of .the existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at
the general meeting by a resolution passed by a majority of the
shareholders present and voting, the scheme shall be submitted to
the Central Government for its sanction.

(4 :If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government
either without modifications or with modifications which are approved at a general meeting, the Central Government shall certify
the scheme, and upon such certification, the scheme shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for the time
being in force, be binding on the corporations affected by the
scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors thereof.

(5) If the scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the Central
Government may refer the scheme to such Judge of the High Court
at Bombay as may be nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice
thereof, and the decision of the Judge in regard to the scheme shall
be final and shall be binding on the corporations affected by the
scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors thereof.

(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be
construed as preventing the Government of the State of Gujarat
from constituting, at any time on or after the appointed day, a State
Financial Corporation for that State under the State Financial
Corporations Act, 1951. 63 of 1951.
Amendment 71. In the Road Transport Corporations Act,of Act 64 of
T950. 1950,—(1) in section 47A,—
(-1) for the words, letters and figures, "the whole or
any part of a State in respect of which a Corporation
was, immediately before the 1st day of November,

[PAGE 28]
or WM Bombay Reorganisation 25
1956," the words "or any other enactment relating to
reorganisation of States, the whole or any part of a
State in respect of which a Corporation was, immediately before the day on which the reorganisation
takes place," shall be substituted;

(ii) in the Explanation, for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—

" (i) in reletion to the Bombay State Road
Transport Corporation, shall mean the Government
of the State of Maharashtra or of Gujarat as formed
under the Bombay Reorganisation Act, 1960;";
(b) in sub-section (3), in clause (f), after the words and
figures "the States Reorganisation Act, 1966", the words "or
any other enactment relating to reorganisation of States"
shall be inserted;

( 2 ) after section 47A, the following section shall be insert
ed, namely:—

"43, Notwithstanding anything contained in section Transit;onal
47A, it shall be lawful for the Government of the State of provision re-
Bombay to frame a scheme under sub-section (/) thereof Blaotiaaty°
and forward the same to the Central Government before state the
1st day of May, 1960, and in such a case, the power con- pRooratcl rr pa
nos: f erred on -the Central Government to make an order under
ration. sub-section (2) thereof may be exercised before that day but
no order so made shall take effect till that day."
38 of 1926. 72. (I) In the Indian Bar Councils Act, 1926,— Special pro-.
(a), in section 4,— vision for Bar
C o u n c i l o f at
(i) to sub-section (2), the following Explanation shall Gujar •
be added, namely: —
"Explanation.—For the purpose of election to the Bar
Council for the High Court of Gujarat, the period of ten
years aforesaid shall be computed after taking into account
the period for which the person concerned was entitled as
of right to practise in the High Court of Bombay or of
Saurashtra or in the Judicial Commissioner's Court of
Kutch before the 1st day of May, 1960.";
(ii) for the proviso to sub-section (4), the following
proviso shall be substituted, namely:—

"Provided that the Advocates-General of West
Bengal, Madras, Maharashtra and Gujarat shall be Chair-

226 Tv1. of Law.

[PAGE 29]
26 Pombay. Reorganisation [ACT ii
men ex-officio, respectively, of the Bar Councils constituted for the High Courts of those States.";

(b) after section 5, the following Section shall be inserted,
namely: —

Ad hoc "5A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
BarCouncil the Chief Justice of the High Court of Gujarat shall nomifor . Gujarat
High Court. nate the members of the first Bat Council under this Act for
the High Court of Gujarat and the members so nominated
shall remain in office for a period of twelve months.".

(2) The assets and liabilities of the Bar. Council for the High
Court of Bombay shall be divided between the Bar Councils for the
High Court at Bombay and the High Court of Gujarat in such
manner as may be agreed upon, and in default of such agreement,
as may be directed by the Attorney-General for India.

Amendment 73. In the Multi-unit Co-operative Societies Act, 1942, after section
of Act 6 5B, the following section shall be inserted, namely:—
of 194z.
Transitional "5C. (1) Where, in respect of any co-operative society
provision specified in the Twelfth Schedule, which under the provisions of
relating to
certain sub-section- (1) of section 5A becomes a multi-unit co-operative
m u l t i - u n i t
cooperative: society, the Board of Directors unanimously adopts any scheme
societies, for the reconstitution, reorganisation or dissolution of the society,
including proposals for the formation of new co-operative
societies and the transfer thereto of the assets and liabilities and
employees of that society and the State GoVernment of 'Bombay
certifies the scheme at any time before the 1st day of May, 1960,
then notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of the said section or any other
law, regulation or bye-law for the time being in. force in relation
to that society, the scheme so certified shall be binding on all
societies affected by the scheme, as well as the shareholders,
creditors and employees of all such societies, subject to such
financial adjustments as may be directed in this behalf under
sub-section (3), but no such scheme shall be given effect to
before the said day.

(2) When a scheme in respect of a co-operative society is so
certified, the Central Registrar shall place the scheme at a meeting,
held in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under
this Act, of all the persons vtrho, immediately before the date of
certification of the scheme, were members of the society and the
scheme may be approved by a resolution passed by a majority of
the members present and voting at the said meeting.

[PAGE 30]
OF 1960] Borah ay Reorganisation 27
(3) If the scheme is not so approved or is approved with
modifications, the Central Registrar may refer the scheme to such
Judge of the High Court at Bombay as may be nominated in this
behalf by the Chief Justice thereof and the Judge may direct such
financial adjustments to be made among the societies affected as
he deems necessary, and the scheme shall be deemed to be
approved subject to those financial adjustments.

(4) If in consequence of the directions given under subsection (3), a society becomes liable to pay any sum of money, the
State within whose area the society is located shall be liable as
guarantor in respect of the payment of such money.".
74. (I) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the foregoing General to
proprovisions of this Part, where any body corporate constituted under vstisn't7tory
a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the State of Bombay corporations.
or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, become an inter-State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall,
as from the appointed day, continue to function and operate in
those areas in respect of which it was functioning and operating
immediately before that day, subject to such directions as may
from time to time be issued by the Central Government, until othet
provision is made by law in respect of the said body corporate.

(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under
sub-section (1) in respect of any such body corporate shall include
a direction that any law by which the said body corporate is governed shall, in its application to that body corporate, have effect
subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified
in the direction.
75. In the Miter-State Corporations Act, 1957, in the preamble, in1
in
",;k1.1Z3siinjf section 2, in clause (f) of sub-section (2) of
section 4 and in section 1957. 5, after the words and figure S
"the States Reorganisation Act, 1956", wherever they occur,
the words "or of any other enactment relating to
reorganisation of States" shall be inserted.

76. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 63 of the Temporary
4 of 1939. Motor Vehicles Act, 1939, a permit granted by the State Transport
ptorovek,ointisnuas
Authority of Bombay or any Regional Transport Authority in thataa ne State
shall, if such permit was, immediately before the appointed tMeoxfist?negr-road
transday, valid and effective in any area in the transferred territory, be port
permits. deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area after that day
subject to the provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area;
and it shall not be necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by the

[PAGE 31]
28 Bombay Reorganisation, [ACT 11
port Authority of Gujarat or any Regional Transport Authority
therein for the purpose of validating it for use in such area :

Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation
with the State Governments of Maharashtra and Gujarat, add to,
amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the Authority by which the permit was granted.

(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall
be levied after the appointed day in respect of any transport vehicle
for its operations in the State of Gujarat under any such permit, if
such vehicle was, immediately before that day, exempt from the
payment of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges for its
operations in the transferred territory:

Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with
the State Governments of Maharashtra and Gujarat, authorise -
.the-levy of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges, as the case
may be.

Special pro- 77. Where on account of the reorganisation of the State of
vision
relating to Bombay under this Act, any body corporate constituted under a
retrenchment Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co-operative societycompensation in cer- registered under any law relating to co-operative societies or any
tam n cases. commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is reconstituted or
reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any
other body corporate, co-operative society or undertaking, or is
dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitution, reorganisation,
amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such body
corporate or in any such co-operative society or undertaking, is
transferred to, or re-employed by any other body corporate, or in any
other co-operative society or undertaking, then notwithstanding
anything contained in section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
such transfer or re-employment shall not entitle him to any 14 of 1947compensation under that section:

Provided that—

(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the
workman after such transfer or re-employment are not less
favourable to the workman than those applicable to him immediately before the transfer or re-employment;

(b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the cooperative society or the undertaking where the workman is
transferred or re-employed is, by agreement or otherwise, legally
liable to pay to the workman, in ethe event of his retrenchment,
compensation under section 25F of the Industrial

[PAGE 32]
OF 1960] Bombay Reorganisation 29
14 of 1941, Disputes Act, 1947, on the basis that his service has been continuous and has not been interrupted by the transfer or reemployment.

78. Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body corporate Special
procarrying on any business are, under the provisions of this Part, ivircioan
in ea st at . transferred to any other bodies corporate which after the transfer
carry on the same business, the losses of profits or gains sustained by the
body corporate first mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have
been allowed to be carried forward and .set off in accordance with the
provisions of section 24 of the Indian Income-tax
it of 1922. Act, 1922, shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accordance with the rules to be made by the Central
Government in this behalf and, upon such apportionment, the share
of loss allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with
in accordance with the provisions of section 24 of the said Act, as if
the transferee body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a
business carried on by it in the years in which these losses were
sustained.

79. (1) The Government of the State of Maharashtra or, as the Continuance
case may be, the Government of the State of Gujarat shall, in respect ofin facilitiescertain
of the institutions specified in the Thirteenth Schedule located in that State institu-
State, continue to provide facilities to the people of the other State tions. 4
which shall not, in any respect, be less favourable to such people than
what were being provided to them before the appointed day, for such
period and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon
between the two State Governments before the 1st day of October;
1960, or, if no agreement is reached by the said date, as may be fixed
by order of the Central Government,
(2) The Central Government may, at any time before the 1st day of
October, 1960, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in the
Thirteenth Schedule any other institution existing on the appointed day
in the State of Maharashtra or of Gujarat, and on the issue of such
notification, the Schedule shall be deemed to be amended by the
inclusion of the said institution therein.
FART VIII
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES

80. (1) In this section, the expression "State cadre"— Provisions relating to
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the All-India
meaning assigned to it in the Indian Administrative Service Services.
(Cadre) Rules, 1954, and
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning
assigned to it in the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954.

[PAGE 33]
30 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service
and the Indian Police Service existing in the State of Bombay imme.
diately before the appointed day, there shall, as from that day, be
two separate cadres, one for the State of Maharashtra, and the other
for the State of Gujarat, in respect of each of these services.

(3) The initial strength and composition of each of the State cadres
shall be such as the Central Government may by order determine
before the appointed day.

(4) The members of each of the said services borne on those cadres
for the State of Bombay immediately before the appointed day shall
be allocated to the State cadres of the same service for each of the
States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in such manner and with effect
from such date or dates as the Central; Government may, by order,
specify.

- (5) Nothing in this section shall he deemed to affect the operation,
61 of 1951. after the appointed day, of the All-India Services Act, 1951, or the rules
de'-thereunder in relation to the State cadres of the mid services
constituted under sub-section (2) and in relation to the members of
those services borne on the said cadres.

Provision 81. (1) Every person who, immediately before the appointed day,relating to
other servi- is serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Bombay shall,
ces. as from that day, provisionally continue to serve in connection
with
the affairs of the. State of Maharashtra, unless he is required, by
 general or special order of the Central Government, to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of the State of Gujarat.

(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central
Government shall, by general or special order, determine the State to
which every person provisionally allotted to. the State of Maharashtra
or Gujarat, shall be finally allotted for service and the date with effect
from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to have taken
effect.

(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of
sub-section (2) to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat shall, if he is
not already serving therein, be made available for serving in that
State from such date as may be agreed upon between the two State
Governments or, in default of such agreement, as may be determined
by the Central Government.

(4) The Central Government may by order establish one or more
Advisory Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to—(a)
the division and integration of the services among the States of

[PAGE 34]
Ør 1060:1 Bombay Reorganisation 31
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons
affected by the provisions of this section and the proper consideration of any representations made by such persons.
(5) The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to
any person to whom the provisions of section 30 apply.
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, after the
appointed day, the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part
XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of
 the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat:

Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person provisionally or
finally allotted to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat under this
section shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.

82. Every person who, immediately before the appointed day, is Provisions
holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection as to continufnce nuance in with the affairs of the State of Bombay in any are? which on
that day o falls within the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat shall continue to
same post. hold the same post or office in that State and shall be deemed, as
from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the
Government of, or other appropriate authority in, that State:

Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a
competent authority, after the appointed day, from passing, in relation
to such person, any order affecting his continuance in such post or
office.
83. The Central Government may give such directions to the State Pon f
Governments of Maharashtra and Gujarat as may appear to it to be
etnimit offor the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions give
rinec-of this Part and the State Government shall comply with such mus.
directions.
84. (1) The Public Service Commission for the State of Bombay Provisions as pt ouBbioer_ shall, as from the appointed day, become the Public Service Corn- nay
mission for the State of Maharashtra. vice commission.
(2) The report of the Bombay Public Service Commission as to the
work done by the Commission in respect of any period prior to the
appointed day shall be presented under clause (2) of article 323 to the
Governors of Maharashtra and Gujarat, and the Governor. of
Maharashtra shall, on receipt of such report, cause a copy thereof
together with a memorandum explaining, as far as possible, as respects

[PAGE 35]
l3omb ay Reorganisation [ACT 11

the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non-acceptance to be laid before the
Legislature of the State of Maharashtra and it shall not be necessary to
cause such report or any such memorandum to be laid before the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Gujarat.

PART IX

LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

85. As from the appointed day, in article 371 of the Constitution,Amendment
of article 371 clause (2)—
in of the Constitution. (a) for the words "the State of Bombay", the words "the State
of Maharashtra or Gujarat" shall be substituted; and
(b) for the words "the rest of Maharashtra", the words "and
the rest of Maharashtra or, as the case may be," shall be
substituted.

- 86. In section 15 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956—Amendment
of Act 37 of (i) in clause (d), for the words "Bombay and Mysore", the1956.
words "Gujarat and Maharashtra" shall be substituted; and

(ii) in clause (e), for the words "Madras and Kerala", the
words "Madras, Mysore and Kerala" shall be substituted.

Territorial 87. The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have effected
extent of any change in the territories to which any law in force immediatelylaws.
before the appointed day extends or applies, and territorial references
in any such law to the State of Bombay shall, until otherwise provided
by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, be construed
as meaning the territories within that State immediately before the
appointed day.
Power to 88. For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the
adapt laws. State of Maharashtra or Gujarat of any law made before the appointed
day, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of one
year from that day, by order, make such adaptations and
modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as
may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall
have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until
altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other
competent authority.

Explanation.—In this section, the expression Puppropriate Government" means as respects any law relating to a matter enumerated in
the Union List, the Central Government, and as respects any other
law, the State Government.

[PAGE 36]
OF 1960] Bombay Reorganisation 33
89. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has Power to
been mude under section 88 for the adaptation of a law made before iraownst.tru
the appointed day, any court, tribunal or authority, required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its
application in relation to the State of Maharashtra or Gujarat,
construe the law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as
may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court,
tribunal or authority.

90. The Government of the State of Gujarat, as respects the trans- Power to
natms e, etc.,autlro ferred territory may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify ri the authority, officer or person who, on or after
the appointed day, for ezerots-shall be competent to exercise such
functions exercisable under any 'fnugncs]jtoanmst,orY law in force on
that clay as may be mentioned in that notification and such law
shall have effect accordingly.

91. Where immediately before the appointed day, the State of Legal pro=
Bombay is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any pro- Ceechngs'
perty, rights or liabilities subject to apportionment between the States
of Maharashtra and Gujarat under this Act, the State of Maharashtra
or Gujarat which succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property or
those rights or liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall
be deemed to be substituted for the State of Bombay as a party to
those proceedings, and the proceedings may continue accordingly.

92. (1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the appoint- Transfer of
ed day before a court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority pendin
ceedingsgpr0or officer in any area which on that day falls within the State of
Maharashtra shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the
transferred territory, stand transferred to the corresponding court,
tribunal, authority or officer in the State of Gujarat.

- (2) -If eny question arises -as to whether any proceeding should
stand transferred under sub-kction (1), it shall be referred to the
High Court at Bombay and the decision of that High Court shall be
final.-

(3) in this section

(a) "proceeding" includes any suit, case or appeal; and
226 NI. of Law.

[PAGE 37]
34 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
(b) "corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer" in the
State of Gujarat means—

(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or
before whom, the proceeding would have lain if it had been
instituted after the appointed day; or

(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority, or
officer in that State, as may be determined after the appointed
day by the Government of that State, or before the appointed
day by the Government of Bombay, to be the corresponding
court, tribunal, authority or officer.

Right of 93. Any person who, immedietely before the appointed day, is enpleaders to rolled as a pleader entitled to practise in eny subordinate courts in the
practise in
certain cases. State of Bombay shall, for a period of one year from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those courts, notwithstanding that
the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those
courts has been transferred to the State of Gujarat.

Effect of 94. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anyprovris of
the Act in- thing inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.
consistent
with other
laws.

Power to 95. If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this
remove Act the President May, by order, do anything not inconsistent with difficulties.
such provisions which appears to him to be necessary or expedient for
the purpose of removing the difficulties.

Power to 96. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
make rules. Gazette, make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.

(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as
may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two successive sessions, and if before the expiry of
the session in which it is so leid or the session immediately
following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be, so however that any such modifications or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.

[PAGE 38]
OF 1960] Bombay Reorganisation gd
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 3(1) (h)]

TERRITORIES TRANSFERRED FROM THE STATE OF BOMBAY TO THE
STATE OF GUJARAT

(Any reference in this Schedule to u census code number in relation
to a village means the code number assigned to that village in the
census of 1951.)

PART I

Umbergaon taluka of Thana District

Name of Village Census Code No.
*Urribergeton 1
2 Kalgaon
Kalai 8
4 Govad
6 Tad gaou
7 Debari
8 Nargol
9 Phansa (whole)
Mamakcvada 11
*Mariali 12
Saronda 13
Achhari 14
Angaon 15
Ahu 16
Eklahare 17
Kachigaon 18
Bhati Karambeli 19
Karambeli Pali 20
Karambele

[PAGE 39]
:=

Bombay Reorganisation LAcT 11
Name of Village Census Code No.

*Khattalwada 22

Ghimse Kakaria 23
Jamburi 24
Tembhi 25
Tumb 26

Dahad 27
Nahuli 28
PaIgaon 29
Pali 30
Punat 31
Borigaon Tarf Kachigaon 32
Borlai 33
Bhilad 34
Manda 35
Manikpur 36
Mohan 37
Vankas 38
Valvada 39
Shirgaon 40
Sanjan 41
&nal 42
Solsumba 43

Humran 44
Dehali 48
Talwada 49
Dhanoli 50
Nandgaon 51
Marav 52
Anklas 55

[PAGE 40]
OF 1960] Bombay Reorganisation 37
Name of Village Census Code No.
Zaroli 67
Nagvas 70

NOTE: includes towns of the same name.

PART IT
West Khandesh District
Nawapur tabika
Name of Village Census Code No.
Abhankuwa (Forest)
Anandpur 2
Dabarghat 3
Bhadbunja 6
Bhint Bk. I/
Blaint Khurd 12
Chacharbunde 18
Chadhavbunde (Forest)
Chhapti 19
Chikhli (Forest)
Dhaj 27
Haripur 35
Jamaki 33
Jamane 36
Kachali 39
Kamalapur 41
Kataswan 48
Khabade 50
Kokambe (Forest)
Manikpur 68
Mirkot 70
Mogarbara (Forest) 72
Mograni (Forest)
Nanchhal 75
Narayanpur 77
Nurabad 82
Pakhari 83

[PAGE 41]
38 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
Name of Village Census CodeNo,

Parchuli 86
Pethapur 89
Sakerde (Digar) 94
Sase 96
Shelud 101
Sundarpur 106
Thuti 108
Uchhal 111
Vadadhe lcd. 115
Vadapatal 117
Zaranpada 123

Nandurbar taluka

Adede 2
Anturli 5
Arkunda (Forest)
Bhilbhavali 19
Bhilj amboli 20
Borathe 25
Borde 23
Chinchode 28
Chorgaon (Deserted) 28A
Devhale 31

Dev Mogra-Gaibi Umber (Forest village Coupe Nos. 1, 2
and 20 of felling series XX
and Coupe Nos. 1 to 9 of
felling series XXI).

Gamadi 39
Gujbarpur 43
Harduli (Digar) 44
Hatnoor (Digar) 46
Hingani (Digar) 48
Kavithe 63
Khairave Kd. T. Dhanore 65
Khodade 69

[PAGE 42]
Os 1960] Bombay Reorganisatton 39
Name of Village Census Code No.
Kothali Budruk 77
Lakhmikhede 79
Lekurwali 80
Mubarakpur 86
Nasarpur o on
tw
Newale 06
Nizar 99
Pimplod T. Nisar 108
Raigad 109
Ranikhadkale (Deserted) 112A
Sarvale 115
Shale 119
Shelu 121
Sulvade 125
Tapikhadkale 128
Vadali 136
Vake 143
Velnde 149
Vyawal 154

PART III
West Khandesh District
Akkalkuwa taluka
N a m e o f V i l l a g e Census Code No.
A k k a l k u w a 1
B u d r u k A n g h a t 6A
B a r k t u r a 15
B h o g w a d C h a t w a d 23
C h o t i K o r a l i 32
( D e s e r t e d ) 35A
D a v a r i a m b a 37
Dogaripada 44
(G) Gangtha 50
ltwai 59

[PAGE 43]
40 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
Name of Village Census Code No.
_
Javan-
Kenvada
Kevadarnoi _ -•79_ -
Khairpada
Khanore 85 - -
Khokwad 91
Koktipada 94
Kolwan 95 -
Langadi
Medhi
Nawagaon (G) 120 -
Nevadi (Aruba) 126- -
Palaswada 132_- -
Pana 133 -
Parod 135
Parodi 136 -
Ratipada 138- -
P i m p a r i p a d a ( R )
Ranipur 150
Ranjaniwad 152
_
Rundigavan . 156 _
U r n a n _ - - - - - - - - - 1 7 6
Umja 175
Umran, _ -
Vadgav - ----
Zapa,arnli , 196-- -
Ziribeda ---

Taloda taluka

Akkalutar

Amide Tarf Satone 6
Amode T. Taloda
Asapur 10
Ashrave 11

[PAGE 44]
OF 060] Bombay Reorgantsatzon 41
Name of Village Census Code No.

Ashte T. Budhawal 13
Bahurupe 14
Balade 16
Balambe 15

Be]
Bhamsal 21

Borikava
Chirmati 31
Chokhiamali 33
Fulwadi 90
Gadid 41
Gorase 44
Hatode 47
Hod. 48
Kelani 56
Kondaraj 64
Kukurmunde 65
Mohammadpur (Deserted) 70A
Matawal 73
Mendhpur 74
Module 77
Morambe 80
Nimbhore 84
Banibare 87
Pati 89
Pimplas 91
Pisawar
Rajnur 95
Ranaichl 08
Sadgaven 10-€3

Sable 108

Torande 120

Tulse 122

Ubhad 123
996 it of Law.

[PAGE 45]
Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
Name of Village Census Code No.
Untavad 126
Varpade 128
Vesgaon 129
Zumkati 131

THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 7)

PART I
Maharashtra Members of the Council of States

Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1962
1. Shri P. N. Rajabhoj.
2. Dr. Waman Sheodas Barlingay.
3. Shri T. R. Deogirikar.
4. Shri G. R. Ku1karni.
5. Shri Dhairyashilrao Yeshwantrao Pawar.
6. Shri M. D. Tumpalliwar
Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1964.
7. Shri Babubhai M. China'.
8. Shri Ramrao Madhaorao Deshmukh.
9. Shri Bhaurao Dewaji Khobaragade.
10. Shri Sonusing Dhansin.g Patti.
11. Shri Lalji Pendse.
12. Shri Abid All.

PART II
Gujarat Members of the Council of States.

Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1962.
1. Shri Jadavji Keshavji Modi.
2. Professor Dr. Raghu Vira.
3. "Vacant"

Members whose term of office expires on the 2nd April, 1964,
4. Shri Rohit Manushankar Dave.
5. Shri Khandubhai K. Desai.
6. Shri Dahyabhai Vallabhbhai Patel.

[PAGE 46]
. !!

OF 1960] Bombay Reorganisation 43

THE THIRD SCHEDULE

(See section 11)
AMENDMENTS TO THE FIRST SCHEDULE TO THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIA-
IVIENTARY AND ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES ORDER, 1956
(1) For the heading "4-BOMBAY", substitute "4-GUJARAT".
(2) In entry 111, after the word "Pardi", insert the word "Umbergaon" and for the words "Surat district", substitute the words "Surat
district; and Dangs district".

(3) After entry 111, add the following Note:—
"Note.—Any reference in this Part to Broach, Surat or
Dangs district or to Son.gadh or Umbergaon taluka of Surat district or to Sagbara taluka of Broach district shall be taken to
mean the area comprised in that district or taluka, as the case
may be, on the 1st day of May, 1960.".
(4) Immediately before entry 112, insert the heading "4 A-
IVIAHARASHTRA".

(5) In entry 129, omit the words "Dangs district;".
(6) To the note after entry 148, add:—
"(3) Any reference in this Part to Thana or West Khandesh
district or to Nawapur, Nandurbar, Akkalkuwa or Taloda taluka
of West Khandesh district shall be taken to mean the area comprised in that district or taluka, as the case may be, on the lst
day of May, 1960.".
(7) hi the Appendix—
(a) for the heading "II-Bombay", substitute "II-Gujarat";
and
(b) immediately before the sub-heading "KOLABA Distric, insert
the heading "II-A MAHARASHTRA".

. THE FOURTH SCHEDULE

(See section 14)

AMENDMENTS TO THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE DELIMITATION OF
PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES ORDER, 1950

(1) For the heading "4-BOMBAY", substitute "4-GUJARAT".
(2) In entry 103, for the words `Sa.rf,bara mahal", substitute "Sagbara
taluka".

[PAGE 47]
44 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
(3) For the sub-heading "SURAT DISTRICT" appearing before
entry 106, substitute the sub-heading "SURAT AND DANGS DIS-
TRICTS".

(4) In entry 114, for the words "Bansda taluka;", substitute
the words "Pangs district; Bansda taluka;".
(5) In entry 118, for the words "Pardi taluka" in coltunn 3,
substitute the words "Pardi and Umbergaon talukas".

(6) After entry 118—
(a) add the following Note:—

"Notc.--Any reference in this Part to Broach, Surat or
Pangs district or to Sagbara taluka of Broach district or to
Songadh or Umbergaon taluka of Surat district shall be
taken to mean the area comprised in that district or
taluka, as the case may be, on the 1st day of May, 1960.";

 (h) after the said Note, insert an Appendix
reproducing items (1) to (33) of the existing Appendix to Part
4 of the Order.

(7) Immediately before the sub-heading "GREATER BOMBAY
DISTRICT", insert the heading "4-A MAHARASHTRA" to make all
following entries, together with the Appendix and Annexure, a
separate Part for the State of Maharashtra.
(8) Omit the asterisk mark before the sub-heading "GREATER
BOMBAY DISTRICT" and foot-notes 1 and 2..
(9) In entry 143, for the words "Dahanu and Umbergaon
talukas", substitute the words "Dahanu taluka".
(10) For the sub-heading immediately before entry 228, for the
words "NASIK AND PANGS DISTRICTS", substitute "NASIK
DISTRICT".
( 11) In entry 230, for the words "Peint and Surgana mahals",
substitute the words "Peint mahal".

(12) In entry 231, for the word "Dangs" in column 2, substitute
the word "Kalwan" and for the words "Pangs district;" in column 3,
substitute the words "Surgana mahal".

(13) In entry 238, for the entry n column 3, substitute "Sakri
and Nandurbar talukas".

(14) In entry 239, for the entry in column 3, substitute
"Nawapur laluka".

[PAGE 48]
OF 19601 Bombay Reorganisation 4c
(15) For the Note appearing immediately after entry 339, substitute:—
"Note.—(1) Any reference in this Part to Thana or West
Khandesh district or to Dahanu taluka of Thana district or to
Nawapur, Nandurbar, A.kkalkuwa or Taloda taluka of West
Khandesh district shall be taken to mean the area comprised in
that district or taluka, as the case may be, on the 1st day of May,
1960.
(2) The names of the 77 census wards of Greater Bombay are
set out in item (I) of the Appendix; and a fuller description of the
Assembly constituencies Nos. 1 to 21 in terms of roads, streets and
other thoroughfares and of villages is given in item (2) of the
Appendix.
(3) The names of the villages in Banoti and Soegaon circles
referred to in the Assembly constituencies Nos. 220 and 221, respectively, are set out in the Annexure to this Part.".
(16) Renumber entries 119 to 339 as entries 1 to 221 respectively,
and the references in those entries to items (36) to (71) and (73) to
(79) of the Appendix as (3) to (45) respectively.
(17) In the Appendix,—
(a) omit items (1) to (33) and the sub-headings thereof;
(b) renumber items (34) to (71) as items (1) to (38) respectively;
(c) omit item (72);
:(d) renumber items (73) to (79) as items (39) to (45) respectively;
and
-(e) in item (2) as so renumbered, renumber the references to
Assembly constituencies Nos. 119 to 139 as Nos. 1 to 21 respectively.

THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
(See Section 22)
AMENDMENTS TO THE DELIIVIITATION 9E COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES
(BOMBAY) ORDERS 1951.
(1) In paragraph 2, for the word "Bombay" substitute the wore
"Maharashtra".
(2) In the Table, omit
(a) the entries relating to—
(i) Gujarat (Graduates) constituency;
(ii) Gujarat (Teachers) constituency;

[PAGE 49]
4e„.

46 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
(iii) Saurashtra (Local Authorities) constituency;
(iv) Gujarat North (Local Authorities) constituency;
(v) Gujarat South (Local Authorities) constituency;
and
(b) the word "Dangs" wherever it occurs in column 2.
(3) In the Table, in column 2,—
(c) against "Vidarbha (Local Authorities)" in column I, for
"Bhandara and Chanda districts," substitute "Bhandara, Chanda
and Rajura districts";
(b) against "Vidarbha (Teachers)" in column -I, after
"Chanda", insert "Rajura";
(d) against "Vidarbha (Local Authorities)" in column 1, for
"Bhandara and Chanda districts," substitute "Bhandara, Chanda
and -Rajura districts".

THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
[See section 23 (1) ]
SITTINGMEMBERSWHOSHALLCEASETOBEMEMBERSOFTHEBOIVERAY
LEGISLATIVECOUNCIL
(i) Members representing any of the five Constituencies specified in
item (2) (a) of the Fifth Schedule.
(ii) The following members.. elected by the *members
of the
Bombay Legislative Assembly, namely:— I.
Shri Dadoobhai Arnin.
2. Shri Chandrakant Chhotalal Mehta.
3. Shri Gulam Heider Walimohammed Moinin.
4. Shrimati Madinabai Akbarbhai Nagori.
5. Shrimati Bhanumatiben Manfial Parekh.
6. Shrimati Anasuya Chhotalal Shah.
7. Shrimati Jyotsnaben Bahusukhram Shukla.

THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE
(See section 26)
AMENDMENTS OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950
(I) For paragraph 4, substitute:--
"4. Any reference in this Order, except Parts IV and VII-A
of the Schedule, to a State or to a district or other territorial

[PAGE 50]
OF 1960] Horabag Reorganisation 47
division thereof, shall be construed as a reference to the State,
district or other territorial division, constituted as from the 1st
day of November, 1956; and any reference in Parts IV and VILA
of the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial division thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State, district
or other territorial division constituted as front the 1st day of
May, 1960".

(2) For Part IV, substitute the following:—

"PART IV.—G7tjarat

1. Throughout the State except the Rajkot Division and the district of
Kutch:---t-

1. Ager

2. Bakad or Bant

3. Bhambi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asocli, Chamactia, Chamar,
Chambhar, Chamgar, Haralayya, Harali, Khalpa, Machigar,
Mochigar, Maths':, Madig, Telegu Mochi, Kamati Mochi, Ranigar, Rohidas, Rohit or Sansgar

41. Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukhi, Malkana, Halalicher; Laibegi, Balmiki,
Korar or Zadmalli

5. Chalvadi or Channayya
6. Chenna Dasar or Holaya Dasar
7. Dhor, Kakkayya or Kankayya
8. Garoda OT Garo
9. Halleer
10. HaIsar, Haslar, Hulasvar or Halasvar
11. Holar or Valhar
12. Hoiaya or Hinter
13 Lingader
14. Mahar, Taral or Dhegu Megu
13. 1VIallyavanshi, Dhed, Vankar or Matt Vankar
16. Mang, Matang or Minimaclig
17. Mang-Garucli
18. IVIeghval or Menghvar
19. Mukri
20. Nadia or Hadi
21. Pasi
22. Shenva, Chenva, Sedma or It:
23. Tirgar or Tirbanda
24. Turi.

[PAGE 51]
4g Bombay Reorganisation [ACT ii
2. In the district of Da_ngs and Umbergaon taluka of. Surat
district:—
Mochi.

3. In the Rajkot Division:-
1. Bawa (Dedh) or Dedh-Sadhu
2. Bhangi or Rukhi
3. Chamadia
4. Chamar, Nalia or Rohit
5. Dangashia
6. Garoda
7. Garmatang
8. Hadi
9. Meghwal
10. Senva
11. Shemalia
12. Thori
13. Turi
14. Turi-Barot or Dedh-Barot
15. Vankar, Dhedh or Antyaj,

4. In the district of Kutch:—
1. Bhangi
2. Chamar
3. Garoda
4. Meghwal
5. Turi
6. Turi-Barot.
(3) After Part VII, insert the following: -

"PART VII-A.—Maharashtra

1. Throughout the State except the districts of Buldan.a, Akola,
Amravati, Yeotmial, Wardha, Nagpur, Bhandara, Chanda, Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Bhir, Osmanabad and Rajura:—
1. Agar
2. Baked or Bant
3. Bhainbi, Bhambhi, Asadaru, Asodi, Chamadia, Chamar,
Chambhar, Chamgar, Haralayya, Harall, Khalpa, Machigar,
Mochigar, Madar, Madig, Mochi, Telegu Mochi, Kamati
Mochi, Ranigar, Rohidas, Raft or Samgar

[PAGE 52]
or 1960] Bombay Reorganisation 49
4. Bhangi, Mehtar, Olgana, Rukhi, 1Vialkana, Halalkhor, Lalbegi, Balmiki,
Korar or Zadmalli
5. Chaly'adi or Channayya
6. Cheima Dasar or Holaya Dasar
7. Dhor, Kakkayya or Kankayya
8. Garoda or Garo
9. Halleer
10. HaIsar, Haslar, Hulasvar or Halasvar
11. Holar or Valhar
12. Holaya or Holer
13. Lingader
14. Mahar, Taral or Dhegu Megu
15. Mahyayanshi, Dhed, Vankar or Maru Vankar
16. Mang, Matang or Minimadig
17. Mang-Garudi
18. 1Vieghval or Menghvar
19. Mukri
20. Nadia or Hadi
21. Pasi
22. Shenva, Chenva, Sedrna or Ravat
23. Tirgar or Tirbanda •
24. Turi.

. 2. In the districts of Buldana, Akola, Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha,
Nagpur, Bhanclara and Chanda:-

1. B Min or Bahana
2. Balahi vr Balai
3. Basor, Burud, Bensor or Bansodi
4. Chamar, Chamari, Mochi, Nona, Rohidas, Ramnami, Satnami,
Surjabanshi or Surjyaramnami
5. Dora or Dumar
6. Dohor
7. Ganda or Candi
8. Ghasi or Ghasia
9. Kaikadi
10. Katia or Patharia
11, Khatik, Chikwa or Chikvi 226
Nrof Law

[PAGE 53]
50 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
12, Madgi
13. Mahar or Meh:ra
14. Mang, Dankhni-Mang, Mang Mahashi, Mang-Garudi, Madari,
Garudi or Radhe-Mang
15. Mehtar or Bhangi
16. Sansi.

3. In the districts of Ako1a, Amravati and Buldana:—
Bedar.
4. In the district of Bhandara:-
1. Chadar
2. Holiya.
5. In the districts of Bhandara and Buldana:—
Khangar, Kanera or Mirdha.
6. In the districts of Amravati, Bhandara and Buldana:—
Kori.

7. In the districts of Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Rajura,
Bhir and Osmanabad:—
1. Anamuk
2. Aray (Mal.a.)
3. Arwa Mala
4. Beda (Budga) Jangam
5. Bind1a
6. Byagara
7. Chalvadi
8. Chambhar
9. Dakkal (Dokkalwar)
10. Dhor
11. Ellamalwar (Ye11amma1awand1)
12. Holeya
13. Holeya Dasari
14. Kolupulvandlu
15. Madiga
16. Mahar
17. Mala
18. Mala Dasari
19. Main Hanriai

[PAGE 54]
sic 1960] Bombay Reorganisation 51
20. Malajangam
21. Mala Masti
22. Mala Sale (Netkani)
23. Mala Sanyasi
24. Mang
25. Mang Garodi
26. Maine
27. Mashti
28. Mehtar
29. Mitha Ayyalvar
30. Mochi
31. Samagara
32. Sindhollu (Chindollu)".

THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE

(See section 27)

AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES)
ORDER, 1956 (I) For paragraph 3, substitute:—

 "3. Any reference in this Order, except Parts IV and VILA
Of the Schedule, to a State or to a district or other territorial
divi--sion thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State,
district or other territorial division, constituted as from the 1st
day of November, 1956; and any reference in Parts IV and VILA
of the Schedule to a State or to a district or other territorial division thereof shall be construed as a reference to the State, district or other territorial division, constituted as from the 1st day
of May, 1960.".

(2) For Part IV, substitute the following: —

"PART IV.—Gujarat

1. Throughout the State except the Rajkot Division and the district of
Kutch:-
1. Barda
2. Bavacha or Bamcha

[PAGE 55]
52 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
3. Bhil, including Bhil Garasia, Dholi Bhil, Dungri.Bhil, Dungri,
Garasia, Mewasi Bhil, Rawal Bhil, Tadvi Bhil, Bhagalia, Bhilala, Pawra, Vasava and Vasave
4. Chodhara
5. Dhanka, including Tadvi, Tetaria and Valvi
6. Dhodia
7. Dubla, including Talavia or Halpati
8. Gamit or Gamta or Gavit, including Mavehi, Padvi, Vasava,
Vasave and Valvi
9. Gond or Rajgond
10. Kathodi or Katkari, including Dhor Kathodi or Dhor
Katkari and Son Kathodi or Son Katkari
11. Kokna, Kokni, Kukna
12. Koli, Dhor, Tokre Koli, Kolcha or Kolgha

: 13.- Naikda or Nayaka, including Cholivala Nayaka, Kapaditi.
Nayaka, Mota Nayaka and Nana Nayaka
14. Pardhi, including Advichincher and Phanse Pardhi
15. Patella
16. Pomia
17. Rathawa
18. Varli
19. Vitolia, Kotwalia or Barodia.

2. In Dangs district, Kunbi.
3, In Surat District:—

(a) in Umbergaan taluka, Koli Malhar, Koli Mahadev ot
Dongar Koli;
(b) in the other talukas, Chaudhri.
4. In the Rajkot Division, Sida.
5. in Nasses area in the forests of Alech, Gir and Barada:—
1. Bharwad
2. Charan
3. Rabari.
6. In Surendranagar district:—
Padhar
7. In Kutch district:—
1. Bhil
2. Dhodia
3. Koli

[PAGE 56]
Or 1960] Bombay Reorganisation 55
4. Paradhi
5. Vaghri.
(3) After Part VII, insert the following: —

"PART VII-A.--Maharashtra

1. Throughout the State except the districts of Buldana, Akala,
Amravati, Yeotmal, Wardha, Nagpur, Bhandara, Chanda, Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Bhir, Osmanabad and Rajura:—
1. Barda
2. Bavache or Damcha
3. Bhil, including Bhil Garasia, Dholi Bhil, Dungri Bhil, Dungri
Garasia, Mewesi Bhil, Rawal Bhil, Tadvi Bhil, Bhagalia,
Bhilala, Pawra, Vosava and Vasave
4. Chodhara
5. Dhanka, including Tadvi, Tetaria and Valvi
6. Dhodia
7. Dubla, including Talavia or Halpati
8. Gamit or Gamta or Gavit, including Maychi, Padvi, Vasava,
Vasave and Valvi
9. Gond or Rajgon.d
10. Kolhodi or Katkari, including Dhor Kathodi or Dhor Katkari
and Son Kathodi or Son Katkari
11. Kokna, KokM, Kulma
12. Koli Dhor, Tokre Koli, Kolcha or Kolgha
13. Naikda or Nayaka, including Cholivala Nayaka, Kapadia
Nayaka, Mota Nayaka and Nona Nayaka
14. Pardlai, including Advichincher and Phanse Para]
15. Patella
16. Fonda
17. Rathawa
18. Varli

19, Vitolia, Kotwalia or Barodia.

2. In Thana district:—
Koli Malhar.

3. (a) In Ahmednagar district:-- l
Akola, Rahuri and Sangamner talukas 1 Koli Mahadev
(b) In Kolaba district:— 1 or
r
Karjat, Khalapur. Alibagh. Mahad and 1 Doregar Koli.
Sudhagad taluleas. J

[PAGE 57]
S4 Bovibay .Fteorganisation [Act 11
(c) In Nasik district:—
Nasik, Niphad, Sinnar, Chandor, Baglan,
Igatpuri, Dindori and Kalvan talukas and
Surgana and Peint Mahals.
(d) In Poona district:— Koli Mavadev
Arnbegaon, Junnar, Khed, Mawal and or
Mulshi talukas and Velhe Mahal. Dongar
Koli.

Thana, Murbad, Bhivandi, Bassein, Wada,
Shahapur, Dahanu, Palghar, Jawhor and
Mokhada talukas.

4. (a) In Ahmednagar district:—
Akola, Rahuri and Sangamner taluloas.
(b) In Kolaba district:—

Karjat, Khalapur, Pen, Panvel and
Sudhagad talukas and Matheran.
Thakur or
(c) In Nasik district:— Thakar including
Igatpuri, Nasik and Sinnar balukas. Ka Thakur,

(d) In Poona district:— (Ka Thakar, Ma
Thakur and Ma Ambegaon, Junnar, Khed and Mawal Thakar.
talukas.

(e) In Thana district:—
Thana, Kalyan, Murbad, Bhivandi, Bassein, Wada, Shahapur, Palghor, Jawhar and
Mokhada talukas.

5. In (1) Melghat tahsil of Amravati district, (2) Gadchiroli and
Sironcha tahsils of the Chanda district, (3) Kelapur, Wani and Yeot-mal
tahsils of the Yeotmal district:—

1. Andh

2. Baiga
3. 13haina

4. Bharia-Bhumia or Bhuinhar-Bhumia including Pancle.

[PAGE 58]
OF 1960] Bornbay Reorganisation 55
5. Bhattra
G. Bhil
7. Bhunjia
8. Binjhwar
9. Birhul or Birhor
10. Dhanwar
11. Gadaba or Gadlye
12. Gond, including—
Arakb or Arrakh
Agaria
Asur
Badi Maria or Bada Maria
Bhatola
Bhimma
Bhuta, Koilabhuta or Koilabhuti
Bhar
Bisonhorn Maria
Chota Maria
Dandami Maria
Dhuru or Dhurwa
Dhoba
Dhulia
Dorla
Gaiki
Gatta or Gatti
Guita
Gond Gowari
Hill Maria
Kandra
Kalanga
Khatola
Koitar
Koya
Khirwar or Khirwara
Kucha Maria
Kuchaki Maria
Madits (Maria)

[PAGE 59]
56 Bombay Reorganisation. [ACT 11
"Niana
Mannewer
Moghya or Mogia or Monghya
Mudia (Muria)
Nagarchi
Nagwanshi
Ojha
Raj
Sonjhari Jhareka
nate or Thotya
Wade Maria or Vacle Maria
13. Halba or Halbi
14 Kamar
Kawar, Kanwar, Kaur, Cheri,va, Rathia Tanwat or Chatti
16 Khairwar
17. Kharia
13. Kondh or Khond or Kandh
19. Kol
20. Kolam
21. Korku, including Bopchi, Mouasi, Nihal or Nahul and
Bondhi or Bondeya
22. Korwa, including Kodaku
23. Majhwar
24. Munda
25. Nagesia or Nagasia
26. Nihal
27. Oraon, including Dhanka and Dhangad
28. Pardhan, Pathari and Saroti
29. Pardhi, including Bahelia or Bahellia, Chita Pardhi, Langoli
Pardhi, Phans Pardhi, Shikari, Takankar and Takia
30. Parja
31. Saonta or Saunta
32. Sawar or Sawara.

6. In the districts of Aurangabad, Parbhani, Nanded, Rajura,
Bhir and Osmanabad :—
1. Andh
2. Bhil

[PAGE 60]
or 1960; Bonzbay Reorganisation
3, Gond (including Naikpod and Rajgond)
4. Kolam (including Mannervariu)
5. Koya (including Bhine Koya and Rajkoya)
6. Pardhan
7. Thoti.

TITF, NINTH SCHEDULE

[See section 45 (1)]
I--MODIFIED FORM OF SECTION 3 OF THE UNION DUTIES 0 XdISE
(DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 1957

(/) Section 3 of the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) Act,
1957, shall, as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to
the following modifications, namely:—

In the Table below section 3, for the entry relating to
Bombay, the following entries shall be substituted, namely:—
"Maharashtra 807
Gujarat 4.10".

(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under
section 3 to Bombay in the first month of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Maharashtra and
Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that financial year,
the distributable Union duties of excise shall be deemed to be onetwelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the distributable Union
duties of excise for that financial year.

11—MODIFIED FORM OF SECTIONS 3 AND 5 OF THE ESTATE DUTY AND
TAX ON RAILWAY PASSENGER FARES (DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 1957

A--Distribution of estate ditty
(I) Section 3 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway Passenger
Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957, shall, as from the 1st day of May,
1960, have effect subject to the following modifications, namely:—

In clause (b) of sub-section (2), for the entry relating to
Bombay, the following entries shall be substituted, namely:—

"Maharashtra 3.97
Gujarat 4.55".

(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under
sub-section (I) of section 3 to Bombay in the first month of the
financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to
226 M. of Law.

[PAGE 61]
58 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
Ailaharashtra and Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of
that financial year, the total amount falling to be distributed shall
be deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the
total amount falling to be distributed for that financial year.

B—Distribution of tax on railway passenger fares

(1) Section 5 of the Estate Duty and Tax on Railway Passenger
Fares (Distribution) Act, 1957, shall, as from the 1st day of May,
1960, have effect subject to the following modifications, namely:—
For the entry relating to Bombay, the following entries shall
be substituted, namely:—

"Maharashtra 10-80
Gujarat 5-48".

(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under
sectioncorn.5 to Bombay in the first month of the financial year
Inencmg on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Maharashtra and
Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that financial year,
the- net proceeds of the tax on railway passenger fares shall be
__deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the
net proceeds of such tax for that financial year.

HI-MODIFIED FORM OF THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THE ADDITIONAL
DUTIES OF EXCISE (GOODS OF SPECIAL IMPORTANCE) AcT, 1957

A—Distribution of additional duties on sugar

(1) In the Second Schedule, the •Table at the end of Part I shall,
as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to the follow;
ing modifications, namely:—

For the entry relating to Bombay, the following entries shall
be substituted, namely:—
• "Maharashtra 8-07 162 13-37
Gujarat 4-10 83 680".
(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount paykable under
Part I of the Second Schedule to Bombay in the first month of the
financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to
Maharashtra and Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that
financial year, the net proceeds of the additional duties in respect of
sugar shall be deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds of such duties for that financial year; and in
respect of that financial year, the sums specified in the third column
of the Table shall be deemed to have been replaced by 20

[PAGE 62]
OF 1960] Bombay Reorganisation 59
for the first month in relation to Bombay and by 149 for the remaining eleven months in relation to Maharashtra and by 76 in relation to
Gujarat.
B—Distribution of additional duties on tobacco

(/) In the Second Schedule, the Table below paragraph 4 shall,
as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to the following modifications, namely:—

For the entries relating to Bombay, the following entries shall be
substituted, namely:—

"Maharashtra 807 76 11.54
Gujarat 4l0 39 5•87".

(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under
paragraph 4 to Bombay in the first month of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Maharashtra and
Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that financial year,
the net proceeds of the additional duties on tobacco shall be deemed
to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds of such duties for that financial year; and in respect of that
financial year, the sums specified in the third column of the Table
shall be deemed to have been replaced by 10 for the first month in
relation to Bombay and by 70 for the remaining eleven months in
relation to Maharashtra, and by 35 in relation to Gujarat.

C—Distribution of additional duties on textiles

(/) In the Second Schedule, the Table at the end of Part III shall, as
from the 1st day of May, 1960, have effect subject to the following
modifications, namely:—

For the entry relating to Bombay, the following entries shall be
substituted, namely:—
"Maharashtra 308 10.91
Gujarat 202 5'55".

(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under Part
III of the Second Schedule to Bombay in the first month of the
financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to
Maharashtra and Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that
financial year, the net proceeds of the additional duties in respect of
cotton fabrics, rayon or artificial silk fabrics and woollen fabrics shall
be deemed to be one-twelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the
net proceeds of such duties for that financial year; and in respect of
that financial year the sums specified in the second column of the

[PAGE 63]
6o Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
Table shall be deemed to have been replaced by 50 for the first month
in relation to Bombay and by 365 for the remaining eleven months in
relation to Maharashtra, and by 185 in relation to Gujarat.

IV—MODIFIED FORM OF PARAGRAPH 3 OF THE CONS11 tJTION (DISTFtIBU-
TioN OF REVENUES) No. 2 ORDER, 1957.
(1) Paragraph 3 of the Constitution (Distribution of Revenues)
No. 2 Order, 1957, shall, as from the 1st day of May, 1960, have
effect subject to the following modifications, namely:—
In the Table at the end of paragraph 3, for the entry relating to Bombay, the following entries shall be substituted,
namely:—
"Maharashtra 10.59
Gujarat 518".

(2) For the purposes of calculating the amount payable under
paragraph 3 to Bombay in the first month of the financial year commencing on the 1st day of April, 1960, and to Maharashtra and
Gujarat during the remaining eleven months of that financial year,
the net proceeds of taxes on income shall be deemed to be onetwelfth and eleven-twelfths, respectively, of the net proceeds of taxes
on income for that financial year.

THE TENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 47(2)]
1. Stores held for specific purposes such as for use or utilisation in
particular institutions, workshops or undertakings or on particular
works under construction shall pass to the State in which such institutions, workshops, undertakings or works are located on the
appointed day.
2. Stores relating to Sachivalaya and offices of Heads of Departments having, immediately before the appointed day, jurisdiction
over the whole of the State of Bombay shall remain the property of
the State of Maharashtra:
Provided that typewriters, duplicators, clocks and vehicles shall
be divided between the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat according to the population ratio.
3. All other unissued stores, pooled stores, and stores purchased
on or after the 1st July, 1959, of any class shall be divided between
the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in proportion to the total
stores of that class purchased in the period of three years ending
with the 31st March, 1960 for the territories included respectively in
 each of those States:

[PAGE 64]
on 1960] Bombay Reorga iLiSCa51011
Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in
respect of any class of stores or where the value of any class of such
stores does not exceed Rs. 10,000, that class of stores shall be divided
between the two States according to the population ratio.

THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
(See section 59)

APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of
the States of Maharashtra and Gujarat shall, in respect of pensions
granted by the State of Bombay before the appointed day, pay the
pensions drawn in its treasuries.
2. Subject to the said adjustments, the liability in respect of
pensions of officers serving in connection with the affairs of the State
of Bombay who retire or proceed on leave preparatory to retirement
before the appointed day, but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the liability of the State
of Maharashtra.
3. There shall be computed in respect of the part of the financial
year commencing on the appointed day and in respect of each subsequent financial year, the total payments made in each of the States
of Maharashtra and Gujarat in respect of pensions referred to in
paragraphs 1 and 2; that total, representing the liability of the State
of Bombay in respect of pensions, shall be apportioned bet-ween the
States of Maharashtra and Gujarat in the population ratio, and the
State paying more than its due share shall be reimbursed the excess
amount by the other State.
4. (1) The liability in respect of the pension of any officer
serving immediately before the appointed clay in c6nnection with
the affairs of the State of Bombay and retiring on or after that day,
shall be that of the State which grants him the pension; but the
portion of the pension attributable to the service of any such officer
before the appointed day in connection with th affairs of the State
of Bombay shall be allocated between the States of Maharashtra and
Gujarat in the population ratio, and the Government which grants
the pension shall be entitled to receive from the other Government
its share of this liability.
(2) If any such officer was serving after the appointed day for
some period in connection with the affairs of the State of Maharashtra and for some period in connection with the affairs of the

[PAGE 65]
62 Bombay Reorganisation [ACT 11
State of Gujarat, the Government bther than the one granting the
pension shall reimburse to the Government by which the pension is
granted on amount which bears to the portion of the pension attributable to his service after the appointed day the same ratio as the
period of his qualifying service after the appointed day under the
reimbursing State bears to the total qualifying service after the
appointed- day reckoned for the purposes of pension.

5. Any reference in this Schedule to 4a pension shall be construed
as including a reference to the commuted value of the pension.

THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE

(See section 73)

1. The Bombay State Cooperative Bank Limited.
2. The Bombay State Cooperative and Mortgage Bank Limited.
3. The Bombay State Cooperative Housing Finance Society.
4, The Bombay State Industrital Cooperative Association.
5. The Bombay State Cooperative Union.
6. Mumbai Rajya Sahakari Karkhana Sangh.

THE THIRTEENTH SCHEDULE

(See section 79)

1. J. J. College of Architecture, Bombay.
2, J. J. Institute of Applied Art, Bombay.
3. School of Printing Technology, Bombay.
4. Government Tanning Institute, Bombay.
5. Government Leather Working School, Bombay.
6. Veterinary College, Bombay.
7. R A. Podar Medical College (Ayurvedic), Bombay.
8. C. E. M. Dental College, Bombay.
9. Haffkine Institute, Bombay.
10. Forensic Science Laboratory and Chemical Analysers Department, Bombay.
11. State Fire School, Ghatkopar, Bombay.
12. Secretariat Record Office, Bombay.
13. Mathematical Instruments Depot and Workshop, Bombay.