[PAGE 1]
visrg H Se TeP-33004/99 ABs _REGD.NO.D.L.-33004/99
Gap
aarta a8
SAITT
EXTRAORDINARY
aT 1—Gvs 3—3a-WUsE (i)
PART Il—Section 3—-Sub-section (i)
wire & werrfere
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
& aa) 7€ facet, qeenfiar, sraqar 4, 2007/enfFas 12, 1929 .
No. $48] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 4, 2007/ASVINA 12, 1929
nen
atrqe
7g Teeah, 4 SRT, 2007
JUL, 643( at) sa Seen, aE ar os Sate (aafaa vam vita) sere, 2005 (2005 #1 50)
SELL. SRG Wee Bacal sl walt aed Ez, Wests aaa ote ces art ae ane se eee Sade S wa sik gas fore
aI Garratas act = fay freafefies fra aard 8, araig
2007 @ |
(2) ta aR Spi ona Se oa Saree ana Samiti ae oh Se
(3) Fe wsca 8 ya at aha Si yar att |
2, after —er Radi dws aa fe ded aap atfes aS, —
Cm) afafren” sey ar ues sachs (argfsa wim whee) sree, 2005 (2005 $1 50) afie 2;
Ce) “adie 4 afte 1 a2 ae Ce) o caefoatia aa eo wee nde afta S
1) Vorpph' Sa frat d dems sage afte é
() Feel as Wesel & dee FT aR” S aia & saqake 239 & arte aeeelh ara Pree fae er
3. Siena Ger at fesres,_(1) SHS BETS fear Ho stseen a ain orn Pdara aadte Sim
(2) feat sinite st sed Se & the tore aq araicia arm sucht eho |
(3) Sel eat darra or arate a qu am vat sen dea wei 2, agi eee ae aq afta we affee Rear ot
weM |
4. weet ara Treat ant attra aon.) Se oa BSR Sine sh, Sate wee ST agaier wo fw
(2) Fat Se TS aE C, Wafers, Sa ws a Sy cers S Sie S, dydies ot sas Get om aT eieG ed
4092 GI2007 (3)

[PAGE 2]
2 | ere HE SAZETTE OF INDIAG EXTRAORDINARY _.._[Pxar Use 94)
We sei fret oer wear A, ar frat S age et Se, weet, se oer a de wads S aide Fate oT
Seer Ser veet Set aeiafera freer gon ¢, wei ae a ei ora sua S ania wa By ance eT vat TO wa GST
5. Reeere ar # weite,—arraia yar A ec a ein, orgy a feats onan at oem Preifare aT |
; 6, Pear arent ae wetL_(1) mere ar anel-ereaia char ent we audhe a wai; yolas oS Yee
(2) sade, wa meat a oi -raata cad arch oR yf a aERYA finer ore at ae tet Gar aaah Sx S
neq ay Gere Be S sae ST ’ ;
7. arent Wy avaeha areal 1 eats an watt srqyet-i 3 fatafhe wifranital ee fadfiee eo
8. Stent wert we aaayia—_(1) audtar at, meni wan, deg seq, sean =e ak asta whores waa
(2) Sate ot, swat or ve edt S oaear aoe fare okt wer Prem dea, sea sare ake wera
Teri sh Sneha farar on wait, fare ates at atthe fret 2 on fey wer ot we Uae S dade A, inte st
; (3) Hatta at, fate # ana 3b corfien fren afte a eizeiia fiom on wate alk fie Saw or wer
(4) eater 1, facet Fo une a atserears gre fase fing 1a qeat we, Sea weer gn w atk sagt wees 3 eet
4 otecta ve & mpat & fore cerita svelte fen at aa
9% fatter ora wetortt @ fre witto fent S code & sets we ge, adhe ar ven ager #
10. Heirs a wate or Prete. _(1) = fae & ate safinga cael a firs aid ot safes (Raa ints aed
a (2) eo Praat & sie srftrge re ae a fet ag ori a atta, flere ater gua, Se, areata aig,
Tara seer, uftve, tact tres, favataerea fret ot af Seats ar yd zat a |
; (3) SN eine ar cafes freva, ar Profi ef an aa, fat Gf a od dawel, yfaareli, ane, wert, dy, eee
eit on fied ora writes & ferg aiaate er wate ae OT ;
(4) tei ter-aent 1, fred stots dade, wtac-ard oh aed ad ot ¢ st td aaa Se S a Ges
. arse Prat & oni cindee ar wan ato farg safinge €, safer, dare, aed steed, oo re at BE |
11, Witte oe gett at Pretftes act are aed site wi—(1) sig sft oat, fret caren, ara, STH AT
OAS weiter & fag ay fare Gaz oxide Yat fast ore fae Real fosnes 3 aot a sad frerdt-sert ama eT
sat =e Sin a sear win Son wai: a
ey Sie ae a ar aE, Se, Freie, fom, data ween Se ages a sae gm oie fret wae
BN So ash Geer ar ToT ATT wee ere ar far eer wigan wo a fat aE Side Yee a ga
12. Sane & feorgs St sere (1) aiehe Sieh fra fem wee, viele ems, ae we
Sr, fel Ue, 7g fare F sues # alk sad we fee a wes S|
(2) Bates # arr, Se ar se, Ger Aras, yao alk then aenit, af Reet @ wre feat at waa S|
; (faa 5 ath 6 ta) ,
3 Wiens ar ampt wien, date meen o saree ar fa, wea arent ar ie qed weres ote am
: wart Feat, wt dads ar garter ae |
(i) Wert, Sra, wert sie da ar ate wat

[PAGE 3]
CAT arg 3,9) AIG 31 TSA + ARTE 3
Gi WaT, STARING, BI, ae, wees, wie Bt Se wee a ae Tay an atitea fee ee
sae aude: Hse afta fen wae ;
(v) alert ety an arate att saat aftr; |
(vi) SR a Prine ue merchancienn, ana S Peis ua werharntenr a arate ott gach sified ;
(viii) 4 che Sar rahe ar area sik Tas aes athe wie cis da arin ar avai ait gas: fired ; |
(xi) wea i times & gent ak wt, afk sa wes oe eas gro Sindh atttge feet ard arse |
txt} Fae ERT Sh aenfiea, Ta ae wal st fe aust oT Ber sft S eee ;
(xiii) wa sit Be Tens Sere & taraa, fam sh aralee sh aad ofan, we cq oer ot da Teas ae
adie sige fron vert a sas aadte Saath afters ren rae
(xiv) Wea Se oy aed at furs eeral ar fae vied & arate oh afer, a seq wee at a esas a !
Baie stipe fer & or cad dade Bande aftatea fer ee
(xv) ae Get oafttrae one ofea at center ser asta acer arm wate aie stk wife ; |
Owl) te feet dent & fret afefran ge nse a rents ar oes see are efi ara ote wfert, ae sa
WAHT : SRS & wah & fag, “afin! ee a Sata men aT Ue een oT ee Tas eT aT a
amet
; aT 7
G TRS a ST ak, aa frefafen centred a oh oi a oot Ta at Fam are et -
(S) went, |
(@) fart wai $ aye afte,
(7) fest Usa & afte, so-ecf a ogee wets S senha,
CH) fat ween # wq@ aft a1 fat feet oss ose arose Ao anges whe a
(S) Went at en $ ts vet ot afi ar - .
Gi) SATE HSK, Wa oe oT Saar wf a vaat Us de oe dom ae a;
(iii) camer shay fart st ant, af ge ta a da aaa ae cde shtga fer aa ¢ ap saat indie
3a aftatere fie we 2, oa Seg es or ee ena SF hee de areal ara feafeatias Serre oes ;
CH) ream,
(S) S-weaf,
(3) Fe teeea ot S-TeeT,
(=) feet wai S wre atthe,

[PAGE 4]
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY [Paar I—Sec. 3(0)}
(a) Rast oat S afte sree a eager whe we semfiere,
(3) faeeh Grant Soya afar ar aages wife are searftrag, ;
(iv) equa S raaten Rat S oye get vee S aera saat at aT art eee site ase TT IT
Gy) Rare reas aede S yge ge sere S tea seeds at ah aah at st ater TAT
(vi) pate area & shdete vem gr veh ore are i, we See Se sre Te Ee Harte Ara ath SE
ja gag ke & fateh soarferfeal ate ware Barre we sree Twente ose St eA F fee ST eT A
oe
safecart, st aot ari 1 eat org at vegan a orate aw CS uate ar sr 8) vehi ae BSA:
(i) sors eh atc S wR, She ae S ame shoes, es oS sae a a, Fa STH eT
Gi) mre 3 ges aa ak See aes & aan, Tor Sra S Gor AAT sie <A wT Sa,
Gi) TH S Shake cet, et S ce Ea, wea fees eee Sarena atk soe, wr Prue vio S
arf vd 37ers, far cise al ts wea Oat Safe (soa at stew) afk aa wade a
fran Banat S sea ok some at a saa, Tafeaks, sre oa at a ada S i TTT
(cafe yer pea an a Tea Br Boa Sta Per en San sa eis a ucts afters far aT eI
arqget -
(i) Patton sfafafice eta & fire agg W fata gevanftel on aeeat & after are ;
(ii) FEAR HWS THR ;
(v) wary oR;
, (it) eth, wan, ae US sai Hoe, St araeae TT; —
Gil) cents waa, Tac, os Prorat nen fate fee rete feet ay Set a eie ao ae feather
mene aia da, oot Sado tw:
(iy) (@) wa dagen gel e acive area a wesiie area ;
(@) da ht tt wa erat oh da wads st ad act derail SF carafe sefrenftal, Foret Sa a
. a Aas Sa F Gade A ayia atta fea a sad sate oftaie fet ;
Gn) west saa oh frat Sete fen che od 2 ange ateotegd je der whe Sais

[PAGE 5]
|
(am ers 37 . HG WSR | ATER 3
Gv) fame ot ea qa, sfera a, Wer Hea ot Yee a aadls S sem, weer wate ee a we
Bet Wl SRT Pele 33 & ise & fee feet sera, ot ark Ss Sam wa a feet fraser oe
Tey Sais US FER S qe ys, vite or ana yen adi fe oe am fad fe ae een gare or i
we fe ae aeard wan
Rreranre_sa sgt weiss & fare wa" S sia data ween, oe ace oft da wed were # ee, ct
cenfeae, te, undies attest fare asa aes ot Se Tada & adhe B dade aint fear o
[oe & 13/9/2006—afee)
ae BAK x4, F iF a Sas
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS .
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 4th October, 2007
G.S.R. 643(E),— In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 11 of the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of
Improper Use) Act, 2005 (50 of 2005), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules regulating the use of the ‘
State Emblem of India in official seal and on Stationery and its design, namely :— ' ;
1. Shor‘ title, extent, application and commencement.— (1) These rules may be called the State Emblem of India |
{Regulation of Use) Rules, 2607, i
(2) It extends to the whole of India and also to the citizens of India outside India. ;
(3) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions.—In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,—~ ;
(a) “Act” means the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Act, 2005 (50 of 2005); ;
(6) “Emblem” means the State Embiem of India as defined in clause (b) of Section 2 of the Act;
(©) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to these rules: ” :
(d@) “State Government” in relation to a Union territory means the Administrator of that Union territory |
appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution. d
3. Design of the official seal.— (1) The design of the Official Seal shall have the embiem enclosed in an oval or
round frame. .

{2) The name of the Ministry or the office shall appear between the inner and outer rims of the frame. |

(3) The abbreviated form of the name of a Ministry or the office may be inscribed where it is not possible to ;
accommodate the name in full, .

4. Adoption by States or Union territories, — (1A State Government may adopt the emblem as the official Emblem
of the State or the Union territory, as the case may be, without obtaining the approval of the Central Government.

(2) Where a State Government Proposes to incorporate the emblem or any part thereof in the Emblem of that State :
or Union territory, as the case may be, it shall do so after obtaining the prior approval of the Central Government and shall :
get the design and lay out approved by the Central Government : .

Provided that where a State Government has already incorporated the emblem or part thereof in the Emblem of that
State or Union territory, as the case may be, prior to the coming into force of these tules, it may, subject to the other
provisions of these rules, continue to use the emblem.

5. Use in official seals.—The use of the emblem in official seal shall be restricted to the authorities specified in
Schedule I.

6. Use on stationery.— (1) The use of the emblem on official or demi-official stationery shall be restricted to the
authorities specified in the Schedule | aforesaid.
(2) The emblem, when printed or embossed on official or demi-official stationery, shal! appear prominently on the
middle of the top of such stationery.
7, Display on vehicles.—The use of the emblem on vehicles shall be restricted to the authorities specified in
Schedule I. Roa
4092 Glfoq-2 Lo

[PAGE 6]
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY [Part 11—Sec. 3(i)]

8. Display on public buildings—(1) The emblem may be displayed on very important public buildings, like, the
Rashtrapati Bhawaa, Parliament House, Supreme Court and Central Secretariat buildings. é

(2) The emblem may be displayed on Raj- Bhawan or Raj Niwas and State Legislature, High Courts and Secretariat
buildings of the States or the Union Territories that have adopted the emblem or have incorporated the emblem in the
Emblem of the State or the Union Territory.

(3) The emblem may be displayed on the premises of India’s Diplomatic Mission abroad and the heads of Missions
tmaay display the emblem at their residences in the countries of their accreditation.

(4) The emblem may be displayed on the buildings occupied by India’s Consulates abroad at the entrance doors
thereof and on the residences of Heads of consular posts in the countries of their accreditation. —

9. Use for various other purposes.—Subject to the provisions of these rules, the emblem may be used for other
Purposes as are specified in Schedule III. -

10. Restriction on the use of the emblem.— (1) No person (including former functionaries of the Government, like, ;
former Ministers, former Members of Parliament, former-Members of Le gislative Assemblies, former judges and retired
Government officials), other than those authorised under these rules, shall use the emblem in any manner.

(2) No Commission or Committee, Public Sector Undertaking, Bank, Municipal Council, Panchayat Raj Institution,
Parishad, non-government organisation, University, other than those authorised under these rales, shall use the emblem in
any manner,

(3) No association or body of persons, whether incorporated or not, shall use the emblem on their letter-heads,
brochures, seats, crests, badges, house flags or for any other purpose in any manner. ‘

(4) The stationery, including letter heads, visiting cards and greeting cards, with emblem printed or embossed on
it, shall not bear words, like, Advocate, Editor, Chartered Accountant with the name of the person authorised to use the
emblem under these rules on the stationery. :

11, Cases and conditions restricting the use of the emblem.— No person shall use or continue to use the emblem
or any colourable imitation thereof for the purpose of any trade, business, calling or profession or in the title of any patent,
or in any trade mark or design: ; a

Provided that a Person or 2 group of persons, association, body, corporate, may use the emblem in connection with an
event organised by it or a publication brought out jointly with a Ministry.or Department of the Central or State Government,
with the prior approval of the Central Government. . ‘

12. Availability of design of the emblem.— (1) Photographic designs of the emblem are available with, and can be ‘

. obtained from, the Manager, Photo Litho Wing, Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi. , ;
. (2) Sample of standard dies of the emblem can be obtained from the Office of the Chief Controller of Printing and
Stationery, New Delhi, : ;
SCHEDULE I
~ , (See rules 5 and 6)
Constitutional or Statutory Authorities, Ministries or Departments of the Central Government, State Governments or
. Union Territory Administrations and other Government Functionaries which may use the Emblem.
@) President, Vice-President, Prime Minister and a Union Minister; . ,
() Governors, Lieutenant Governors, Administrators, if the emblem is adopted by, or incorporated in the
Emblem of, that State or the Union Territory, as the case may be;
(i) Office and officers of the Parliament of India;
(iv) Judges and office and officers of the Fadiciary,
(v) Office and officers of the Planning Commission; ; :
(vi) Chief Election Commissioner of India, Election Commissioners and the office and officers of the Election
Commission of India;
(vii) Comptroller and Auditor General of India, the office and officers of the Comptrolier and Auditor General ;
of India; ‘ *
_ (vit) Chairperson and Members of the Union Public Service Commission and the office and officers of the
Union Public Service Commission; i
@) Ministries, Departments and offices of the Central Government and their officers;

[PAGE 7]
CATT — es 3(;) FRG SH UA: Stara : : 7 i
4 i
Gd) Chief Ministers and Ministers of the States and the Union tertitories, if the emblem is adopted by, or
incorporated in the Emblem of, that State or the Union territory; i
(sii) Members of Parliament and members of State orthe Union territory. Legislative Assemblies or Councils, ;
. as the case thay be; : i.
(x8) Ministries, Deparimenis and offices of the State and the Union territory Governments and their officers, if . '
the emblem is adopted by, or incorporated in the Emblem of, that State or the Union territory; |
(xiv) Office and officers of the State or the Union territory Legislative Assemblies or Councils, if the emblem is
adopted by, or incorporated in the Emblem of, that State or the Union territory, .
(xv) Commissions and authorities, constituted or established by an Act of Parliament or set up by the Ceniral
Government: ;
(vi) Commissions and authorities constimted or established by an Act of the State Legislature or set up by |
the State Government, if the emblem is adopted by, or incorporated in the Emblem of, that State or the |
Union territory;
Explanation - For the Purpose of this Schedule, the expression ‘officer’ shall mean a Sazetted officer of the Central
Government; or the State Government orthe Union territory Administration. :
SCHEDULE I
7 (See mle 7) -
PARTI |
Constitutional Authorities and other Dignitaries which taay Display the Emblem on their Cars :
t
@ cars of Rashtrapati Bhawan, when the following dignitaries or their Spouses are travelling by such vehicles:
a) President,
(0) visiting Heads of foreign States,
(c) visiting Vice-Presidents of foreign State or dignitaries of equivalent Status, .
e !
(d) visiting heads of foreign Governments or dignitaries of equivalent Status like Crown Prince or j
Princess of a foreign State, :
(©) the Spare car following the car of the President:
Gi) car of Vi ice-President when he or his spouse is travelling by such vehicle; :
(ii) carsof Raj Bhawan and Raj Niwas, if the emblemis adopted by, or incorporated in the Emblem of, that State |
or the Union territory, when the following dignitaries or their spouses are travelling by such vehicles within d
the State or the Union terrliory concerned: i
2 (@) President, o
(®) Vice- President, , :
(©) Governor of the State, ; 14
(@) Lieutenant Governor of the Union territory, |
(©) Visiting Heads of foreign States, i
@ Visiting Vice-Presidents of foreign States or dignitaries of equivalent status, |
(8). Visiting Heads of foreign Governments or dignitaries of equivalent status; .
(iv) cars and other means of transport used by the Heads of India’s Diplomatic Missions in the countries of i
their accreditation;
(v) cars and other means of transport used by the Heads of India’s Counseliot posts abroad in the countries of
their accreditation; ‘ . t
(vi) cars maintained by the Pro tocol Division of the Ministry of External Affairs when in use for duty with the
, foreign dignitaries of the tank of Cabinet Ministers and above visiting India, and Ambassadors accredited ,
to India on ceremonial occasions. .

[PAGE 8]
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY [Part Il—Ssc. 3()]
Bo
PART I :
_ Authorities which may Display the Ashoka Chakra (which is Part of the Emblem) on Triangular
Metal Plaques on their Cars : :
() cars of the Prime Minister and Ministers of the Union, Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha,
Deputy Chairperson of the Rajya Sabha when travelling anywhere in India; : :
(i) cars of Chief Justice of India and Judges of the Supreme Court, and Chief Justices and Judges of High :
Courts within their respective territories; : \
(iii) cars of Cabinet Ministers in States, Ministers of States in States, Speakers and Deputy Speakers of the State
Legislative Assemblies, Chairmen and Deputy Chairmen of Councils of States, Ministers (other than Deputy |
Ministers) of Union territories with Legislature, and Speakers and Deputy Speakers of Legislative Assemblies |
in Union territories, when they are travelling within their State or Union territory, as the case may be (if the |
emblem is adopted by, or is incorporated in the Emblem of, the State or the Union territory). |
(See rule 9) : /
Other Purposes for which Emblem may be used —
(i) Visiting Cards of the functionaries or officers specified in Schedule-I for legitimate representational 7
purpose; . i
(i) | Greeting Cards sent by functionaries or officers specified in Schedule-I for legitimate representational !
purpose, -
(ii) official publications of the Government, .
(iv) films and documentaries produced by the Government,
(v) stamp papers; :
(vi) Government advertisements, banners, pamphlets, boards, etc.;-
(vil) crests, flags, seats with such modification as considered necessary; ’
: (viii) identity cards, licenses, permits, etc., issued by the Government; _
(ix) websites of the Government, ‘ : “
(%) coins, currency notes, promissory notes and postal stamps issued by the Mint or Press of the Government é
: of India; . ;
(xi) Medals, Certificates and Sanads instituted by the Goverment;
(xi) invitation cards for functions of the Government; :
, (xi) representational glassware crockery and cutlery used at the Rashtrapati Bhawan, Raj Bhawans, Raj Niwases
and Indian Missions or Posts ahroad; ‘
(dv) Badges, collars, buttons, etc., with such modifications as are considered necessary, on the uniforms of—
(a) commissioned or gazetted officers of the anmed forces of the Union; .
(b) gazetted officers of uniformed services (other than armed forces) of the Union and such of the
State Governments and Union territory Administrations that have adopted the emblem, or have
incorporated the.emblem in the Emblem of that State or Union territory;
(c) authorised staff of Rashtrapati Bhawan and Indian Missions or Posts abroad;
(xv) school textbooks, books on history, art or culture or in any periodical as part of the text of a Chapter,
Section, etc., for the purpose of explaining or illustrating the origin, significance or adoption of the emblem:
: Provided that the emblem shall not be uséd on the front page, title or cover of such publication so as to give
an impression that it is a Government publication, _
Explanation :—For the purpose of this Schedule, the “Government” includes the Central Government; the State Governments
__ and Union territory Administrations, which have adopted or incorporated thé emblem inthe Emblem of that
, State or Union territory, as the case may be.
; {F. No. 13/9/2006-Public]
a . "ARUN KUMAR YADAY, It. Secy.
Printed by the Manager, Govt. of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Dethi-110054.