[PAGE 1]
: / yeee
7 aalunee sto
a —\\. 7 Q 1
Government of Puducherry
Lieutenant Governor's Secretariat
a
No. LGS/2017/05/02 Dt. 62/05/2017
To
Shri. Satish Kunfar Singh,
Under Secy. tg GOI (UTL), ‘
Ministry of Home Affairs,
New Delhi. 110 001
Sir,
Sub: Providing of updated copy of the Rules of Business of
the Government of Puducherry — Reg.
Ref. Your Lr. No. 11018/1/2017-UTL (Part-II), dated 28" April, 2017
received by fax on 01/05/2017
-- 000 :-

Adverting to the letter cited under reference, I am to attach herewith a copy of
the letter of Secretary to Government (Law), Government of Puducherry dated
02/05/2017 along with an updated version of the Rules of Business of the Government
of Puducherry, 1963 duly authenticated by Shri. N. Murugavel, Under Secretary to
Government (Law), Government of Puducherry for your reference.

Yours faithfully,
A
(G. THEVA NEETHI DHAS)
SECRETARY to Lt. GOVERNOR
Encl: As above

[PAGE 2]
GOVERNMENT OF PUDUCHERRY
LAW DEPARTMENT
ek

No.PA/US/LD-2017/5 Dated: 02.05.2017
To
The Secretary to Lt. Governor,
Lieutenant Governor’s Secretariat,
Raj Nivas, Puducherry.
Sir,

Sub: Rules of Business of the Government of Puducherry, 1963-Updated,

authenticated copy-Submitted.
Ref: (i) Lr.No.LGS/2017/04/04/, dated 12/04/2017 of the LG Secretariat,
Puducherry.
(ii) M.H.A’s Lr.No.11018/1/2017/-UTL(Part-Il), dt.28.04.2017.
; (iii) Lr.No.LGS/2017/05/01, dated 02/05/2017 of the LG Secretariat,
Puducherry.
2K OK

Adverting to the letters cited above, | am to enclose a copy of the updated and
authenticated version of the "Rules of Business of the Government of Puducherry, 1963 for
your kind reference.

Yours faithfully,
SI
(G.SENDIL KUMAR)
LAW SECRETARY

Encl:- As stated above.

[PAGE 3]
oa 248
“ THE RULES OF BUSINESS OF THE GOVERNMENT OF PONDICHERRY, 1963.
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFIARS
New Delhi-11, the 224 June, 1963.
In exercise of the powers conferred by article 239 and the proviso to article 309
of the Constitution, section 46 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20
of 1963) and all other powers enabling him in that behalf, the President hereby
makes the following rules, namely:-
CHAPTER - I
Preliminary
1. These Rules may be called the Rules of Business of the Government of
Pondicherry, 1963. ;
2. (1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, --
(a) ‘the Act’ means the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963
(20 of 1963);
(b) “the Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union
territory of Pondicherry;
(c) “Chapter” means a Chapter of these rules;
(d) “the Council” means the Council of Ministers appointed under
section 44 of the Act;
(e) “Department” means any of the departments or officers specified
in the Schedule to the Business of the Government of
Pondicherry (Allocation) Rules, 1963;
(f) “the Government” means the Government of Pondicherry;
(f-1) “Legislative Assembly” or “Legislature of the Union territory”
means the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory;
(g) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to these rules;
(h) “Secretary” means a Secretary in a Department and includes
Secretary to the Administrator and the Chief Secretary.
(2) Unless the context otherwise requires, General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of
1897) shall apply for the interpretation of these rules as it applies for the
interpretation of a Central Act.

[PAGE 4]
249 ee
CHAPTER - IT 6
General

3. The business of the Government shall be transacted in accordance with
these rules.

4. (1) The business of the Government in relation to matters with respect to
which the Council is required under section 44 of the Act to aid and advise the
Administrator in the exercise of his functions shall be transacted and disposed of
in accordance with the provisions of Chapter III.

(2) The remaining business of the Government shall be transacted and
disposed of in accordance with the provisions of Chapter IV.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) and sub-rule (2),
prior reference in respect of the matters specified in Chapter V shall be made to the
Central Government in accordance with the provisions of that Chapter.

5. (1) All contracts: in connection with the administration of the Union
territory of Pondicherry shall be expressed to be made by the President and shall
be executed on behalf of the President by such person and in such manner as he
may direct or authorise under article 299 of the Constitution.

*[(2) Where the person authorised to execute contracts is the
Administrator, he shall exercise that authority with previous approval of the
Central Government in all cases involving exercise of financial powers in excess of
those delegated to him from time to time by the Central Government. ]

(8) Any other person authorised to execute contract shall exercise that

authority, --

(a) if the contract is in connection with public works upto the
monetary limits prescribed under the Central Public Works Department
Code or orders of the Central Government;

(b) in other cases upto such monetary limits and subject to such
conditions as the Administrator may prescribe whether generally or in
respect of specified classes of contracts to be executed by specified
classes of officers:

Provided that in any case covered by clause (b), prior approval of the
Central Government shall be obtained, if such approval is required in that case
under sub-rule (2).

* Sub-rule (2) of rule 5 has been substituted by notification No. U-11022/2/73-UTL = dated 234
November 1973, of the MHA, GOL New Delhi. .

[PAGE 5]
De, 250
os CHAPTER - Ilt
Disposal of Business allocated among Ministers

6. (1) The Council shall be collectively responsible for all executive orders
issued from any department in the name of the Administrator or contracts made in
exercise of the powers conferred on the Administrator or any officer subordinate
to him in accordance with these rules, whether such orders or contracts are
authorised by an individual Minister on a matter pertaining to the Department
under his charge or as the result of discussion at a meeting of the Council or
howsoever otherwise.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-rule (1), the Minister in
charge of a department shall be primarily responsible for the disposal of the
business pertaining to that department.

7. (1) The rules and orders made by the Central Government to regulate
the procedure in its departments and offices relating to sanctioning of expenditure,
appropriation and re-appropriation of funds, public works and purchases
of stores required for use in the public service shall, subject to the rules governing
the delegation of powers to the Administrators and any general or special orders
of the Central Government, continue to apply in relation to the departments and
offices of the Government of the Union territory.

(2) Unless the case is fully covered by the powers to sanction
expenditure or to appropriate or re-appropriate funds conferred by any general or
special orders made by the Finance Department, no Department shall, without the
previous concurrence of the Finance Department, issue any order, which may --

(a) involve any abandonment of revenue or involve any expenditure
for which no provision has been made in the Appropriation Act;

(b) involve any grant of land or assignment of revenue or concession,
grant, lease or licence in respect of mineral or forest rights or rights to
water power or any easement or privilege;

(c) relate to the creation or abolition of posts, fixation of strength of a
service; or

(d) otherwise have a financial bearing whether involving expenditure
or not.

(3) No proposal which requires previous concurrence of the Finance
Department under this rule, but in which the Finance Department has not
concurred, may be proceeded with unless a decision to that effect has been taken
by the Council.

[PAGE 6]
251 ; .

(4) No re-appropriation shall be made by any Department other than the
Finance Department, except in accordance with such general delegation of power
of re-appropriation as the Finance Department may have made.

(5) Except to the extent that power may have been delegated to the
Department under rules approved by the Finance Department, every order of an
administrative Department conveying a sanction to be enforced in audit shall be
communicated to the audit authorities by the Finance Department.

(6) Nothing in this rule shall be construed as authorising any authority
or Department, including the Finance Department, --

(a) to make re-appropriation from one Grant or Appropriation for
charged expenditure to another Grant or Appropriation for charged
expenditure;

(b) to re-appropriate funds provided for charged expenditure to meet
votable expenditure;

(c) to re-appropriate funds provided for voted expenditure to meet
charged expenditure;

(d) to appropriate or te-appropriate funds to meet expenditure ona
new service not contemplated in the budget as approved by the
Legislative Assembly.

8. The Chief Secretary shall be the Secretary to the Council and the
Secretary to the Administrator shall be the Joint Secretary to the Council. When
the Secretary to the Council is absent, the Joint Secretary shall perform his duties.

9. Subject to the orders of the Chief Minister under rule 10, all cases
referred to in the Schedule shall be brought before the Council in accordance with
the provisions contained in this Chapter:

Provided that no case in regard to which the concurrence of the Finance
Department is required under rule 7 shall, save in exceptional circumstances and
under the directions of the Chief Minister, be discussed by the Council unless the
Finance Minister has had opportunity of considering it.

10. All cases referred to in the Schedule shall be submitted to the Chief
Minister after consideration by the Minister in charge with a view to obtaining his
orders for the Circulation of the case under tule 11 or for bringing it up for
consideration at a meeting of the Council.

[PAGE 7]
(54)
an 252

11. (1) The Chief Minister may direct that any case submitted to him under
rule 10 may, instead of being brought for discussion at a meeting of the Council, be
circulated to the Ministers for opinion, and if all the Ministers are unanimous and
the Chief Minister thinks that a discussion at a meeting of the Council is
unnecessary, the case shall be decided without such discussion. If the Ministers
are not unanimous or if the Chief Minister thinks that discussion at a meeting is
necessary, the case shall be discussed at a meeting of the Council.

(2) If it is decided to circulate any case, the Department to which the
case belongs shall prepare a memorandum setting out in brief the facts of the case,
the points for decision and the recommendations of the Minister-in-charge and
forward copies thereof to the Secretary to the Council who shall arrange to
circulate the same among the Ministers and simultaneously send a copy thereof to
the Administrator.

12. (1) While directing that a case shall be circulated, the Chief Minister may
also direct, if the matter be urgent, that the Ministers shall communicate their
opinion to the Secretary to the Council by a particular date which shall be specified
in the memorandum referred to in rule 11.

(2) If any Minister falls to communicate his opinion to the Secretary to
the Council by the date specified in the Memorandum, it shall be assumed that he
has accepted the recommendations contained therein. _ ~

(3) If the Ministers have accepted the recommendations contained in the
Memorandum or the date by which they were required to communicate their
opinion has expired, the Secretary to the Council shall submit the case to the Chief
Minister. If the Chief Minister accepts the recommendations and if he has no
observation to make, he shall return the case with his orders thereon to the
Secretary to the Council. -

(4) On receipt of the case, the Secretary to the Council shall
communicate the decision to the Administrator and pass on the case to the
Secretary concerned, who shall thereafter take necessary steps to issue the orders
unless a reference to the Central Government is required in pursuance of the
provisions of Chapter V.

13. When it has been decided to bring a case before the Council, the
Department to which the case belongs shall, unless the Chief Minister otherwise
-directs, prepare a memorandum indicating with sufficient precision the salient
facts of the case and the points for decision. Copies of the memorandum and such
other papers as are necessary to enable the case to be disposed of shall be
forwarded to the Secretary to the Council who shall arrange to circulate the
memorandum to the Ministers and simultaneously send a copy thereof to the
Administrator.

[PAGE 8]
14. In cases which concern more than one Department, the Ministers shall ~
attempt by previous discussion to arrive at an agreement. If an agreement is
reached, the memorandum referred to in rule 11 of rule 13 shall contain the joint
recommendations of the Ministers; and if no agreement is reached, the
memorandum shall state the points of difference and the recommendations of each
of the Ministers concerned.

15. (1) The Council shall meet at such place and time as the Chief Minister
may direct.

(2) Except with the permission of the Chief Minister, no case shall be
placed on the agenda of a meeting unless papers relating thereto have been
circulated as required by rule 13.

(3) After an agenda paper showing the cases to be discussed at a
meeting of the Council has been approved by the Chief Minister, copies thereof
together with copies of such memoranda as have not been circulated under rule
13, shall be sent by the Secretary to the Council to the Administrator, the Chief
Minister and other Ministers so as to reach them two days before the date of such
meeting. The Chief Minister may, in case of urgency, curtail the said period of two
days.

(4) If any Minister is on tour, the agenda paper shall be forwarded to the
Secretary in the Department-concerned who, if he considers that the discussion of
any case should await the return of the Minister, may request the Secretary to the
Council to take the orders of the Chief Minister for a postponement of the
discussion of the case until the return of the said Minister.

(5) The Chief Minister or in his absence, any other Minister nominated
by the Chief Minister, shall preside at a meeting of the Council.

(6) The Secretary of the Department concerned with the case may be
required to attend the meeting of the Council, if the Chief Minister so directs.

(7) The Secretary to the Council shall attend all the meetings of the
Council and shall prepare a record of the decisions. He shall forward a copy of
such record to each of the Ministers.

16. (1) The decision of the Council relating to each case shall be separately
recorded and after approval by the Chief Minister or the Minister presiding, shall
be placed with the records of the case. An advance copy of the record of the
decision prepared by the Secretary to the Council and also of the record of the
decision of the Council, as approved, shall be forwarded by the Secretary to the
Council to the Administrator.

[PAGE 9]
. CyQRrs
ae 254
oo (2) When a case has been decided by the Council and the approved
record of the decision has been communicated to the Administrator, the Minister
concerned, shall take action to give effect to the decision.
DEPARTMENTAL DISPOSAL OF BUSINESS
A - General

17. Except as otherwise provided by or under these rules, cases may be
disposed of by or under the authority of the Minister-in-charge who may, by
means of standing orders, give such directions as he thinks fit for the disposal of
cases in the Department. Copies of such standing orders shall be sent to the
Administrator and the Chief Minister.

18. Each Minister shall, by means of standing orders, arrange with the
Secretary of the Department what matters or classes of matters are to be brought to
his personal notice. Copies of such standing orders shall be sent to the
Administrator and the Chief Minister.

19. Every Monday (or if it is a holiday, on the next working day), the
Secretary shall submit to the Minister-in-charge a statement showing the
particulars of important cases disposed of in the Department by the Minister and
the Secretary and other officers during the preceding week. A copy of the said
statement shall be simultaneously submitted also to the Administrator and to the
Chief Minister. ,

20. (1) When the subject of a case concerns more than one Department, no
order shall be issued (nor shall the case be laid before the Council) until it has been
considered by all the Departments concerned, unless the case is one of extreme
urgency.

(2) If the Departments concerned are not in agreement regarding such a
case, the Minister-in-charged of any of the Departments may, if he wishes to
proceed with the case, direct that the case be submitted to the Chief Minister for
orders or for laying the case before the Council.

21. (1) A Secretary may call for and see the papers in any Department, other
than the Finance Department or Appointments Department, if such papers are
required for the disposal of any case in his Department.

(2) A requisition made under sub-rule (1) shall be dealt with under the
general or special orders of the Minister-in-charge.

(3) (a) A Minister may call for papers from any Department for his
information:

[PAGE 10]
255 7

Provided that if the paper is of a secret nature, it shall be sent to the ‘
Minister only under the orders of the Minister-in-charge of the Department to
which it belongs:

Provided further that no paper under disposal shall be sent to any Minister
until it has been seen by the Minister-in-charge of the Department to which it
belongs.

(b) If the Minister is of opinion that any further action should be
taken on the papers called for by him from any Department, he shall communicate
his views to the Minister-in-charge of the Department concerned and, in case of
disagreement, may submit the case to the Chief Minister with a request that the
matter be laid before the Council. No further notes shall be recorded in the cases
before the papers are so laid before the Council.

(4) (a) The Chief Secretary may, on the orders of the Chief Minister or
any Minister or of his own motion, call for and see the papers relating to any case
in any Department and such a requisition by him shall be complied with by the
Secretary to the Department concerned.

(b) The Chief Secretary may, after examination of the case, submit it
for the orders of the Minister-in-charge, or the Chief Minister through the
Minister-in-charge.

(5) The Administrator may call for papers relating to any case in any
Department and such a request shall be complied with by the Secretary to the
Department concerned who shall simultaneously inform the Minister-in-charge of
the Department of the action taken by him.

22. If a question arises as to the Department to which a case properly
belongs, the matter shall be referred for the decision of the Chief Secretary who
shall, if necessary, obtain the orders of the Chief Minister.

23. All communications, received from the Central Government (including
those from the Prime Minister and other Ministers of the Central Government)
other than those of a routine or unimportant character, shall, as soon as possible
after receipt, be submitted by the Secretary to the Minister-in-charge, the Chief
Minister and the Administrator for information.

24. Any matter which is likely to bring the Government of the Union
territory into controversy with the Central Government or with any State
Government shall, as soon as the possibility of such a controversy is seen, be
brought to the notice of the Administrator and the Chief Minister.

25. The following classes of cases shall be submitted to the Administrator
through the Chief Minister before the issue of orders, namely:-

(i) cases raising questions of policy; : - os -

[PAGE 11]
an 256

(ii) cases which affect or are likely to affect the peace and tranquility of
the Union territory;

(iii) cases which affect or are likely to affect the interest of any minority
community, Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes;

(iv) cases which affect the relations of the Government of the Union
territory with any State Government, the Supreme Court or the High Court at
Madras;

(v) constitution of Advisory Boards under section 9 of the Maintenance
of Internal Security Act, 1971 (26 to 1971);

(vi) cases required to be referred to the Central Government under the
Act or under Chapter V;

(vii) cases pertaining to the Administrator’s Secretariat and personal
establishment and other matters relating to his office;

(viii) Omitted.

(ix) financial proposals involving new taxation;

(x) Omitted; | ‘

(xi) all proposed resolutions on Administration Reports;

(xii) Omitted;

(xiii) cases relating to issue of rules under an Act in force in the Union

territory; ;

(xiv) petitions for mercy from persons under sentence of death and other
important cases in which it is proposed to recommend any revision of a judicial
sentence;

(xv) any departure from these rules which comes to the notice of the
Chief Secretary or the Secretary of any Department;

(xvi) cases relating to summoning, prorogation and dissolution of the
Legislative Assembly, removal of disqualification of voters at elections to the
Legislative Assembly, fixing of dates of elections to the Legislative Assembly and
other connected matters;

(xvii) Omitted; te tab ae

[PAGE 12]
257 .

(xviii) matters relating to Plan evaluation;

(xix) any case of administrative importance as the Chief Minister may
consider necessary.

26. Where in any case the Administrator considers that any further action
should be taken or that action should be taken otherwise than in accordance with
the orders passed by the Minister-in-charge, the Administrator may require the
case to be laid before the Council for consideration whereupon the case shall be so
laid:

Provided that the notes, minutes or comments of the Administrator in any
such case shall not be brought on the Secretariat record unless the Administrator
so directs.

27. The Chief Minister shall --

(a) cause to be furnished to the Administrator such information relating
to the Administration of the Union territory and proposals for legislation as the
Administrator may call for; and

(b) if the Administrator so requires, submit for the consideration of the
Council any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which
has not been considered by the Council.

B - FINANCE DEPARTMENT

28. The Finance Department shall be consulted in all cases in which its
previous concurrence is necessary under these Rules.

29. When the Finance Department is consulted / under these Rules, the
views of that Department shall be brought on to the permanent record of the

Department to which the case belongs and shall form part of the case.

30. (1) The Finance Minister may call for any papers from any Department
in which financial consideration is involved and the Department, to whom the
request is addressed, shall supply the papers.

(2) On receipt of papers called for under sub-rule (1), the Finance
iVinister may request that the papers with his notes on them shall be submitted to
the Couneil.

[PAGE 13]
| : Cus)
oa 258
7 (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (1) of rule 7, the Finance
Department may make rules to govern financial procedure in general in all
departments and to regulate the business of the Finance Department and the
dealings of other departments with the Finance Department.
C ~LAW DEPARTMENT

31. Except as hereinafter provided, the Law Department is not, in respect of
legislation an originating or initiating Department and its proper function is to put
into technical shape the projects of legislation on which the policy has been
approved; and every proposal to initiate legislation shall be considered in, and if
necessary, transferred to the Department to which the subject matter of the
legislation relates and the necessity for legislation and all matters of substance to
be embodied in the Bill shall be discussed and, subject to rule 6, settled in such
Department.

32. Proposals to initiate legislation shall be treated as a case and shall be
disposed of accordingly:

Provided that the case shall not be submitted to the Chief Minister until the
department concerned has consulted the Law Department as to -

(i) _ the need for the proposed legislation from a legal point of view;

(ii) the competence of the legislature of the Union territory to enact the
measure proposed;

(iii) the requirements of the Constitution, the Act or any other law for
the time being in force as to the obtaining of the previous sanction of the President
thereto; and

(iv) the consistence of the proposed measure with the provisions of the
Constitution and in particular those relating to the fundamental rights.

33. If legislation is decided upon, the department shall, if the legislation
involves expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, prepare
in consultation with the Finance Department, a financial memorandum. The
papers shall then be sent to the Law Department requesting it to draft the Bill
accordingly.

34, The Law Department shall thereafter prepare a draft Bill and return the
case to the Department concerned.

35. The Administrative Department shall obtain the opinion of such officers
and bodies as it deems necessary on the draft Bill and submit the opinion so
ceceived with a copy of the draft Bill to the Minister-in-charge.

[PAGE 14]
259 ;

36.1£ the draft Bill is approved by the Minister-in-charge, it shall be

circulated to the other Ministers and a copy thereof shall be supplied to the

Administrator and thereafter the draft Bill shall be brought before a meeting of the
Council in accordance with these Rules.

37. If it is decided to proceed with the draft Bill, with or without
amendments, the originating department shall send the case to the Law
Department requesting it to prepare a final draft of the Bill.

38. The Law Department shall then finalise the draft and send it to the
originating Department indicating at the same time the sanctions, if any, required
for the Bill. If any provisions in the Bill involving expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory are modified in the finalised draft, the
originating Department shall send the finalised draft Bill to the Finance
Department for revising, if necessary, the financial memorandum.

39. The originating Department shall then transfer the final draft Bill to the
Law Department with the instructions of the Council thereon, including
instructions as to its introduction in the Legislative Assembly and with copies of
such papers relating to the Bill, such as, the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the
Financial Memorandum, the Memorandum of Delegated Legislation, etc., as
should be forwarded to the Legislative Assembly. After such transfer, the Bill
shall be deemed to belong to the Law Department.

40. Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 31, measures designed
solely to codify and consolidate existing enactments and legislation of a formal
character such as repealing and amending Bills may be initiated in the Law
Department:

Provided that the Law Department shall send a copy of the draft Bill to the
Department which is concerned with the subject matter, for consideration as an
administrative measure and the Department to which it is sent shall forthwith
make such enquiries as it thinks fit and shall send to the Law Department its
opinion thereon together with a copy of every communication received by it on the
subject.

41, (1) Whenever a private member of the Legislative Assembly gives notice
of his intention to move for leave to introduce a Bill, the Law Department shail
forthwith send a copy of the Bill and the Statement of Objects and Reasons for
information to the Chief Minister and to the Department to which the case
belongs.

(2) The Bill shall be dealt with as a case by the Law Department in the
first instance, where it shall be considered in its technical aspects, such as, need for
previous sanction of the Presiclent or the Administrator and the competence of the
Legislative Assembly to enact the measure and thereafter the Law Department
shall forward the case with its opinion to the Department to which it belongs.

[PAGE 15]
_* 260

; (3) If any provisions of such Bill involve expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory, the Department shall, before it is
circulated, prepare, in consultation with the Finance Department, the financial
memorandum in respect of the Bill.

42. The provisions of rule 41 shall apply, as far as may be, to amendments of
substance recommended by the Select Committee and also to all amendments,
notice of which is given by members of the Legislature for being moved during the
consideration of a bill in that legislature.

43. (1) When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly, it shall be
examined in the Department concerned and the Law Department and shall be
presented to the Administrator with -

(a) a report of the Secretary of the Department concerned as to the

reasons, if any, why the Administrator’s assent should not be given; and

(b) a report of the Law Secretary as to the reasons, if any, why the

Administrator’s assent should not be given or the Bill should not be

reserved for the consideration of the President.

(2) Where the Administrator directs that the bill should be reserved for
the consideration of the President or returned to the Legislative Assembly,
together with a message for reconsideration as is mentioned in the first proviso to
section 25 of the Act, necessary action in that behalf shall be taken by the Secretary
to the Administrator in consultation with the Secretary of the Administrative
Department concerned and the Law Secretary,

(3) After obtaining the assent of the Administrator or the President, as
the case may be, the Law Department shall take steps for the publication of the Bill
in the Official Gazette as an Act of the Legislative Assembly.

44. Whenever it is proposed in any Department (other than the Law
Department)-

(i)to issue a statutory rule, notification or order;

(ii)to sanction under a statutory power the issue of any rule, bye-law,

notification or order by a subordinate authority; or

(ii) to submit to the Central Government any draft statutory rule,

notification or order for issue by them;
the draft shall be referred to the Law Department for opinion and for revision
where necessary.

45. (1) AU administrative department shall consult the Law Department on -

(a) the construction of Statutes, Acts, Regulations and statutory rules,

orders and notifications;

(b) any general legal principles arising out of any case;

(b) the institution or withdrawal of any prosecution at the instance of

any administrative department; and

(c) the preparation of important contracts to be entered into by the

Government.

(2) Every such reference shall be accompanied by an accurate statement
of the facts of the case and the point or points on which the advice of the Law
Department is desired. at poo ee pe

[PAGE 16]
261 oo
CHAPTER-IV ~
DISPOSAL OF BUSINESS RELATING TO ADMINISTRATOR’S EXECUTIVE

FUNCTIONS REFERRED TO IN SUB-RULE (2) OF RULE 4

46. The Administrator may, by standing orders in writing, regulate the
transaction and disposal of the business relating to his executive functions referred
to in sub-rule (2) of rule 4:

Provided that the standing orders shall be consistent with the provisions of
this Chapter, Chapter V and the instructions issued by the Central Government
from time to time:

Provided further that in the exercise of his functions with respect to the
property of the Union situated within the Union territory, the Administrator shall
act in consultation with the Council.

47. (1) With respect to persons serving in connection with the
administration of the Union territory, the Administrator shall exercise such power
and functions as may be entrusted to him under the rules and orders regulating
the conditions of service of such persons or by any other order of the President.

(2) In the exercise of the powers and functions referred to in sub-rule (1),
the Administrator shall act in consultation with the Chief Minister.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2),
the Administrator shall consult the Union Public Service Commission on all
matters in which the Commission is required to be consulted under clause (3) of
article 320 of the Constitution; and in every such case shall not make any order
otherwise than in accordance with the advice of the Union Public Service
Commission unless authorised to do so by the Central Government.

(4) All correspondence with the Union Public Service Commission and
the Central Government regarding recruitment and conditions of service of
persons serving in connection with the administration of the Union territory shall
be conducted by the Chief Secretary under the direction of the Administrator.

48. In regard to any matter referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 4 and in respect
of which no specific provisions has been made in the foregoing rules in this
Chapter, the Administrator may, if he deems fit, either consult his Council or the
Chief Minister, before exercising his powers or discharging his functions in respect

[PAGE 17]
7 CHAPTER V
REFERENCES TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

49. The Administrator may refer to the Central Government any draft Bill
before it is introduced in the Legislature of the Union territory. When a draft Bill
is referred to the Central Government under this rule, the advice of the Central
Government shall be await4d before the Bill is introduced in the Legislature of the
Union territory.

50.In case of difference of opinion between the Administrator and a
Minister in regard to any matter referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 4, the
Administrator shall endeavour by discussion of the case to settle any point on
which such difference of opinion has arisen. Should the difference of opinion
persist, the Administrator may direct that the case be referred to the Council.

Sl. In case of difference of opinion between the Administrator and the
Council with regard to any matter referred to in sub-rule (1) of rule 4, the
Administrator shall refer it to the Central Government for the decision of the
President and shall act according to the decision of the President.

52. Where a case is referred to the Central Government in pursuance of rule
51, it shali be competent for the Administrator to direct that action shall be
suspended pending the decision of the President on such case or, in any case
where the matter is in his opinion so urgent that it is necessary that immediate
action should be taken, to give such direction as he deems necessary.

53. Where a direction has been given by the Administrator in pursuance of
rule 52, the Minister concerned shall take action to give effect to such direction.

54. (1) In respect of each financial year, the Administrator shall have a |
development plan (which shall represent the approved phase for the year in the |
Five Year Plan for the Union territory) drawn up with such details as the Central |
Government may be order prescribe, |

(2) After the annual plan has been considered by the Administrator and
his Council, it shall be referred to the Central Government for approval.

[PAGE 18]
263 oT

55. (1) The Form of the annual financial statement of the Union territory ~
(including the grants and appropriations in which it shall be divided) and the
procedure for obtaining the approval of the President to this statement shall be
such as the Central Government may by order prescribe,

(2) Each demand for grant or appropriation shall be so drawn up as to
indicate separately the provision for plan schemes and the provision for non-plan
expenditure,

56. (1) The Administrator shall refer to the Central Government every Bill

which --

(a) If passed by the Legislative Assembly, is required to be reserved for
the consideration of the President under sub-section (2) of section 21 or, as
the case may be, under the second proviso to section 25, of the Act;

(b) relates to any matter enumerated in the Concurrent List in the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;

(c) attracts the provisions of article 304 of the Constitution as applicable
to the Union territory;

(d) relates to any matter which may ultimately necessitate additional
financial assistance from the Central Government through substantive
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory or
abandonment of revenue or lowering of the rate of any tax;

(e) pertains to any matter relating to Universities;

(f) affects or is likely to affect the interests of any minority community,

- Scheduled Caste or Backward Class.

(2) Subject to the provisions of any instructions which may from time to
time be issued by the Central Government, the Administrator shall make a prior
reference to the Central Government in the Ministry of Home Affairs or to the
appropriate Ministry witha copy to the Ministry of Home Affairs, in respect of the
following matters, namely:-

.

[PAGE 19]
So CWA)
wo. 264
Oe (a) all important cases raising questions of policy;
(b) cases affecting the relations of the Central Government with any
State Government, the Supreme Court or any High Court or the Court of
Judicial Commissioner;
(c) proposals for appointment of the Chief Secretary, Development
Commissioner, Finance Secretary, Law Secretary, Inspector General of
Police, and appointments to posts which carry an ultimate salary of
Rs.2,000/~- per mensem or more;
(d) Inter-sectional alteration in plan schemes; and
(e) non-delegated financial powers.
57. Notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules, a prior reference
shall be made to the Central Government or Chief Engineer, Central Public Works .
Department or such other engineering officers as the Central Government may
prescribe, in regard to all matters relating to public work undertaken by the
Government of the Union territory in which the sanction of the Central
Government or Chief Engineer or other, engineering officers aforesaid, as the case
may be, is required under the Central Public Works Code or Orders of the Central
Government issued in that behalf.
58. When a matter has been referred by the Administrator to the Central
Government or any other authority under these Rules, further action thereon shall
not be taken except in accordance with the decision of that Government or
authority.
CHAPTER - VI
|
MISCELLANEOUS |
59. The Chief Secretary and the Secretary of the Department concerned are
severally responsible for the careful observance of these Rules and when either of
them considers that there has been any material departure from them, he shall |
personally bring it to the notice of the Minister-in-charge, the Chief Minister and
the Administrator.

[PAGE 20]
265 eo,
SCHEDULE “
(See rules 9 and 10)

1. Cases relating to summoning and prorogation and dissolution of the
Legislative Assembly, removal of disqualification of voters at elections to the
Legislative Assembly, fixing of dates of elections to the Legislative Assembly and
other connected matters.

2. The annual financial statements to be laid before the Legislature and
demands for supplementary, additional or excess grants.

3. Cases in which the attitude of the Council to any resolution or Bill to be
moved in the Legislature is to be determined.

4, Proposals for the imposition of a new tax or any change in the method of
assessment or the pitch of any existing tax or land revenue or irrigation rates.

5. Any proposal which effects the finances of the of the Union territory
which has not the consent of the Finance Minister.

6. Any proposal for re-appropriation to which the consent of the Finance
Minister is required and has been withheld.

7. Proposals involving the alienation, either temporary or permanient, or of
sale, grant or lease of Government property exceeding rupees three thousand in
value or the abandonment or reduction of revenue exceeding that amount except
when such alienation, sale, grant or lease of Government property is in accordance
with the rules or with a general scheme already approved by the Council.

8. The annual audit review of the finance of the Union territory and the
report of the Public Accounts Committee.

9. Proposals involving any important change in policy or practice.

10. Proposed circulars embodying important changes in the administrative
system of the Union territory.

11. Any proposal for the institution or withdrawal of a prosecution by
Government against the advice tendered by the Law Department.

12. Proposals for the creation or abolition of any public office the maximum
remuneration of which exceed rupees two hundred and fifty.

13, Appointment of Committees of Inquiry on the initiative of the
Government or in pursuance of a resolution passed by the Legislature of the Union
territory and reports of such Committees. :,.. } . Spe ay oye eed Cae?

[PAGE 21]
Be 266

14. Cases required by the Administrator or Chief Minister to be brought
before the Council.

15. Omitted.

16. Proposals relating to rules to be made under proviso to section 33(1) of

the Act.

17. Draft Bills and proposals for legislation.

18. Proposals for reference to President for decision on questions arising as
to whether a member of the Legislative Assembly has become subject to any
disqualification under section 14(1) of the Act; any proposal to recover or to waive
recovery of the penalty due under section 15, of the Act.

19. Proposals to vary or reverse a decision previously taken by the Council.