[PAGE 1]
j .
THE GOVERNORS (EMOLUMENTS, ALLOWANCES AND PRIVILEGES) ACT, 1982
(43 OF 1982)

(28"" AUGUST, 1982)

An Act to determine the emoluments, allowances and privileges of Governors.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows: -
1. SHORT TITLE, EXTENT AND COMMENCEMENT: (1) This Act may be called the
Gavernors (Emoluments, Allowances and Privileges) Act, 1982.

(2) {t extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date the Central Government may. by notification
in the Official Gazette. appoint. ('*)
2. In this Act. unless the context otherwise requires: -

"I(a) “ex-Governor” means a person who has been the Governor of a State or two or
more States;

(aa) “Governor” means the Governor, or any person discharging the functions of the
Governor, of any State or of two or more States:]

(b) “maintenance”:-

(i) in relation to official residences, includes the provisions of electricity. gas and ,
water;

(ii) in relation to motor vehicles, includes the pay and allowances of chauffeurs and
the provision of oil and petrol and other fuel;

(c) “members of the family”, in relation to a Governor. means ? [spouse, dependent
children and the dependent parents] of the Govemor:

(d) “official residences”, in rclation to a Governor means such residences as may be
specified by the President, by notification in the Official Gazette, as the official residences of the
Governor and includes the staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant thereto and the gardens
thercof:

(ec) “rules” means rules made under this Act;

(f) “state” does not include a Union Territory.

(*) With effect from 1" April, 1987 [GSR 342(E) dated 30" March, 1987].
? | | Substituted by Act 8 of 2014 and made effective from 16" July, 2014.
*{ | deemed to come into effect form 1* January, 2007 (Act 1 of 2009)

[PAGE 2]
~ ’ ;
2 >
3. EMOLUMENTS: There shall be paid to every Governor emoluments at the rate of |
°*~(rupees one lakh ten thousand per mensem).

Provided that ifa Governor, at the time of his appointment: -

(a) is in receipt of a pension (other than disability or wound pension) in respect of
any previous service under the Government of India or any of its predecessor Governments or
under the Governments of a State or any of its predecessor Governments. his emofuments shall
be reduced:-

(i) by the amount of that pension; and

(11) if he has, before such appointment. received in lieu of a portion of the pension due
to him in respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof. by the amount of that
portion of the pension; [or]

“@@@ [(ii) Omitted]

(b) is in receipt of any benefit by way of contributory provident fund, his emoluments
shall be reduced by the pension equivalent of such benefit.

4. LEAVE ALLOWANCE: (1) Subject ta any rules made in this behalf. the President
shall grant such leave to a Governor as he may consider necessary.

(2) Where a Governor is granted leave by the President he shall. during the period of

: such leave. be paid leave allowance at such rate as the President may by order determine.

Provided that such leave allowance shall be reduced to that extent. if any. to which the
cmoluments of the Governor are liable to be reduced under the proviso to Section 3.

5. USE AND MAINTENANCE OF OFFICIAL RESIDENCES: A Governor shall be
entitled. without payment of rent, to the use of his official residences throughout his term of
office and no charge fall on the Governor personally in respect of furnishing or the maintenance
of such residences.

6. HOUSEHOLD ESTABLISHMENT: Subject to any rules made in this behalf. no
charge shall fall on a Governor personally in respect of pay. allowances or pension or other
emoluments paid to, or facilities provided for, the members of the household establishment
provided to the Governor.

7. MEDICAL TREATMENT: Subject to any rules made in this behalf. a Governor and
the members of his family shall be entitled during the term af his office and thereafier also, to
' * Section 3 deemed to come into effect from |“ April. 1986 (Act 17 of 1987).

*~() Substituted by Act | of 2009 and made effective from 1™ January. 2006.

’ [| | Substituted and @@@ omitted vide Act 1 of 1994 and deemed to have come into effect from 1°‘ June. 1988.

[PAGE 3]
4 a °
free medical attendance, accommodation and treatment in the hospitals maintained by the
Central Government or the Government of any State.

8. CONVEYANCE: (1) A Governor shall be entitled to use without payment of rent
or hire, such number of motor vehicles as the President, may by order determine.

(2) No charge shall fall on a Governor personally in respect of the maintenance of
such motor vehicles referred to in sub-section (1).

(3) The use of motor vehicles referred to in sub-section (1) by the members of the
tamily of a Governor shall be regulated by rules made in this behalf.
9. TRAVELLING ALLOWANCE ON ASSUMPTION OR VACATION OF OFFICE:
Subject to any rules, made in this behalf, a Governor shall be entitled to travelling allowance for
himself and members of his family and for the transport of his and his family’s effects -

(a) in respect of the journey for assuming office from the place where he is ordinarily
residing to the place of his duty; and

(b) in respect of the journey on relinquishing office from the place of his duty to the
place where he would ordinarily reside thereafter or if he is to take up any other office under the
Government (including the office of the Governor of another State) after such relinquishment. to
the place of duty with respect to such other office.
10. ALLOWANCES FOR RENEWING FURNISHINGS AND FOR MAINTENANCE
OF OFFICIAL RESIDENCES: Subject to any rules made in this behalf. a Governor shall be
entitled to such allowances for renewing the furnishings and for the maintenance of the official
residences. as the President may by order determine.
ft. OTHER PRIVILEGES AND ALLOWANCES: For the purpose of enabling a
Governor to discharge conveniently and with dignity the dutics of his office. he shall be -

(1) entitled to such other privileges as may be prescribed by rules made in this behalf.
and

(ii) paid, subject to any rules made in this behalf. such amount. as the President may.
by general or special order, determine by way of the following namely: -

a) entertainment allowance;

b) hospitality grant;

c) houschold establishment expenses:

d) office expenses;

e) contract allowance. i.e. an allowance for miscellaneous expenses:

f) tour expenses: and

g) such other allowances or expenses as may be provided for by the rules.

[PAGE 4]
4 .
12. ADDITIONAL EXPENSES: (1) Where, in the ease of any Governor, the President is
satisfied that the amount authorised under this Act by way of any allowances or for mecting any
expenses with respect to any matter requires to be increased or that a need has arisen to sanction
expenses with respect to any matter for which provision, though permissible. has not been made
in the rules made under this Act. he may by special order increase such amount or sanction such
expenses to such extent as may be specified in such order,
(2) An order may be made under sub-section (1) so as to have retrospective effect.
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it js
made, before both houses of parliament.
THA. Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the ex -Governor shall. for the remainder of his
life, be entitled to secretarial assistance of one Personal Assistant on reimbursement basis:
Provided that where such ex-Governor is re-appointed to the office of the Governor or elected
to Parliament or the State Legislature or appointed to any office of profit under the Union or a
State Government. he shall not be entitled for such secretarial assistance for the period during
which he holds such office. |
13. POWER TO MAKE RULES: (1) The President may by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.
(2) Tn particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power. such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :-
; (a) grant of leave to a Governor under Section 4;
(b) maiters relating to. the household establishment provided to a Governor under
Section 6;
(c) medical attendance, accommodation and treatment of a Governor and the
members of his family under Section 7:
(d) the use of motor vehicles by the members of the family of a Governor under subsection 3 of Section 8;
(e) ihe travelling allowance on assumption or vacation of office of a Governor under
Section 9;
(f) allawances for renewing the furnishing and for the maintenance of the official
residences under Section 10:
(g) the privileges to which a Governor is entitled and the allowances or expenses
payable to a Governor under Section | I.
2 —
[ ] inserted vide Act 8 of 2014 and made effective from 16" duly, 2014.

[PAGE 5]
— 5

8(h) the manner of providing secretarial assistance and reimbursement under section
12A,}

(3) Every rule made by the President under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be

afier it is made, before. cach House of Parliament. while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days. which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions. and if.
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the
rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafier have effect only in such modified form or be of
no effect. as the case may be. so, however. that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
14. VALIDATION: (1) Every special order issued, before the commencement of this Act.
by the President in regard to the allowances, expenses (including medical expenses) or privileges
of any Governor (other than the Governor of Nagaland) shall, notwithstanding that such order
was made with retrospective effect, or is inconsistent with any general order issued under any
law with respect to those matters, be as valid and effective as if such special order formed part of
this sub-section and this sub-section had been in force at all material times.

(2) Every gencral or special order issued. before the cominencement of this Act. by
the President in regard to the allowances, expenses (including medical expenses) or privileges of
the Governor of Nagaland shall, notwithstanding that such order was made with retrospective
effect, be as valid and effective as if it formed part af this sub-section and this sub-section had
been in force at all material times.

15. SAVING: Nothing contained in this Act or the rules made thercunder shall have
effect so as to diminish the emoluments and allowances of any Governor during his term of
office.

*[ | inserted vide Act 8 of 2014 and made effective from 16" July. 2014.