[PAGE 1]
a ste Pe er 04/000 7/2003—05 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—05
—~
Py
: ware”
: EXTRAORDINARY
\ aM W— ave
| PART II — Section 1
wiht 8 weit
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
‘de 43] 78 facet, qeeafta, fracax 30, 2004 / Why 9, 1926
No. 43] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, DECEMBER 30, 2004 / PAUSA 9, 1926
a url 4 fist 7s ten a ont 8 fred fir ae rem daca S&T eT GL
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
EY OE ME aS 8 Separate compilation, —
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 30th December, 2004/Pausa 9, 1926 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
29th December 2004, and is hereby published for general information -—
THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) AMENDMENT
ACT, 2004
No. 29 oF 2004
[29th December, 2004.]
AnAct further to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. ,
Bz it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
: 1. (/) This Act may be called the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Short title
Act, 2004. and commencement
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2ist day of September, .
2004.

37 of 1967. 2. In the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment
principal Act), in the long title, after the word “associations”, the words “, and for dealing of long title.
with terrorist activities,” shall be inserted,

5 of 1898 3. In the principal Act, for the words and figures “Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898”, — Substitution of
wherever they occur, the word “Code” shall be substituted. word “Code”

for “Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1898”

[PAGE 2]
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Parr ir .
De
Amendment 4. In Chapter I of the principal Act, for sections 1, 2 and 2A, the following sections
of Chapter I. shall be substituted, namely:—
Shon ine ‘1. (1) This Act may be called the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 37 of 1967.
extent an .
application. (2) It extends to the whole of India.
(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Act for every act or
‘ omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he is held guilty in India.
: (4) Any person, who commits an offence beyond India, which is punishable
under this Act, shall be dealt with according to the provisions of this Act in the same
. manner as if such act had been committed in India.
(5) The provisions of this Act apply also to— ‘
(a) citizens of India outside India; ‘
(b) persons in the service of the Government, wherever they may be; and +
(c) persons on ships and aircrafts, registered in India, wherever they may
be. .
Definitions. 2. (/) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “association” means any combination or body of individuals;
(b) “cession of a part of the territory of India” includes admission of the
claim of any foreign country to any such part;
(c) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 2 of 1974.
(d) “court” means a criminal court having jurisdiction, under the Code, to
try offences under this Act; :
(e) “Designated Authority” means such officer of the Central Government
not below the rank of Joint Secretary to that Government, or such officer of the
State Government not below the rank of Secretary to that Government, as the
case may be, as may be specified by the Central Government or the State
Government, by notification published in the Official Gazette;
(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “proceeds of terrorism” means all kinds of properties which have been 7
derived or obtained from commission of any terrorist act or have been acquired
through funds traceable to a terrorist act, irrespective of person in whose name
such proceeds are standing or in whose possession they are found, and ;
includes any property which is being used, or is intended to be used, for the
purpose of a terrorist organisation; :
(h) “property” means property and assets of every description, whether
corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and deeds .
\ and instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets, and
includes cash and bank account;
(i) “secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union” includes °
the assertion of any claim to determine whether such part will remain a part of the
territory of India ;
‘ () “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means the
Administrator thereof,
(4) “terrorist act” has the meaning assigned to it in section 15, and the
expressions “terrorism” and “terrorist” shall be construed accordingly,
(J) “terrorist gang” means any association, other than terrorist organisation,
whether systematic or otherwise, which is concerned with, or involved in,
terrorist act; .

[PAGE 3]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
aaa ee eee
.
(m) “terrorist organisation” means an organisation listed in the Schedule
or an organisation operating under the same name as an organisation so listed;
() “Tribunal” means the Tribunal constituted under section 5;
(0) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means
any action taken by such individual or association (whether by committing an
act or by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representation
or otherwise),-—
(2) which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any
ground whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or the ;
secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, or which incites
any individual or group of individuals to bring about such cession or
secession; or : :
(i) which disciaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India; or
(iii) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India;
(p) “unlawful association” means any association,—
(@ which has for its object any untawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the
members undertake such activity; or
(i) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under
45 of 1860. section 153A or section 153B of the Indian Penal Code, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any such activity, or of which the
members undertake any such activity:
Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii) shall apply to the State
of Jammu and Kashmir; .
(q) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in
the Code shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Code.
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in
relation to an area in which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be
construed as a reference to the corresponding law or the relevant provision of the
Corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.’.
5. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), for the word and figures Amendment
“Chapter XXXV”, the word and figures “Chapter XXVI” shall be substituted. of section 5.
6. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, Substitution of
namely:— new section for
section 10.
“10. Where an association is declared unlawful by a notification issued under Penalty for
section 3 which has become effective under sub-section (3) of that section, — being member
. OF an
(a) a person, who— unlawful
: association,
(/ is and continues to be a member of such association; or ete.
(ii) takes part in meetings of such association; or
(iii) contributes to, or receives or solicits any contribution for the
purpose of, such association; or
(iv) in any way assists the operations of such association, ,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years,
and shall also be liable to fine; and

[PAGE 4]
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
—

(8) a person, who is or continues to be a member of such association, or
voluntarily does an act aiding or promoting in any manner the objects of such
association and in either case is in possession of any unlicensed firearms, .
ammunition, explosive or other instrument or substance capable of causing
mass destruction and commits any act resulting in loss of human life or grievous
injury to any person or causes significant damage to any property,—

(i) and if such act has resulted in the death of any person, shall be
punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to ;
fine;

(i) in any other case, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a .
term which shal! not be less than five years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.”.

Substitution of 7. For Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapters and the Schedule shall .
new Chapters be substituted, namely:—
and Schedule
for Chapter IV. ‘CHAPTER IV
PUNISHMENT FOR TERRORIST ACTIVITIES
Terrorist act. 15. Whoever, with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty ‘
of India or to strike terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any
foreign country, does any act by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances
. or inflammable’substances or firearms or other lethal weapons or poisons or noxious
gases or other chemicals or by any other substances (whether biological or otherwise)
of a hazardous nature, in such a manner as to cause, or likely to cause, death of, or
injuries to any person or persons or loss of, or dantage to, or destruction of, property .
or disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community in India
or in any foreign country or causes damage or destruction of any property or equipment
used or intended to be used for the defence of India or in connection with any other
purposes of the Government of India, any State Government or any of their agencies,
or detains any person and threatens to kill or injure such person in order to compel the
Government in India or the Government of a foreign country or any other person to do
or abstain from doing any act, commits a terrorist act.
Punishment 16. (1) Whoever commits a terrorist act shafl,— ‘
for terrorist . . : ;
tet erro (a) if such act has resulted in the death of any person, be punishable with
death or imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;
(6) in any other case, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment 17. Whoever raises fund for the purpose of committing a terrorist act shall be
for raising punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but
fond for act which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. .
Punishment for 18. Whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets, advises or
conspiracy, ete. incites or knowingly facilitates the commission of, a terrorist act or any act preparatory
to the commission of a terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life,
and shall also be liable to fine.
Punishment for 19. Whoever voluntarily harbours or conceals, or attempts to harbour or
-harbouring, conceal any person knowing that such person is a terrorist shall be punishable with
ete. imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that this section shall not apply to any case in which the harbour or
concealment is by the spouse of the offender.

[PAGE 5]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
20. Any person who is a member of a terrorist gang or a terrorist organisation, Punishment for
which is involved in terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term being member
which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. gang ot
organisation.
21. Whoever knowingly holds any property derived or obtained from commis- Punishment
sion of any terrorist act or acquired through the terrorist fund shall be punishable with ro ecgding
imprisonment for a term which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be a arorism.
liable to fine.
22. Whoever threatens any person who is a witness or any other person in Punishment
. whom such witness may be interested, with violence, or wrongfully restrains or con- ing threatenfines the witness, or any other person in whom the witness may be interested, or does
any other unlawful act with intent to cause any of the said acts, shall be punishable
with imprisonment which may extend to three years, and shall also be liable to fine.
23. (7) If any person with intent to aid any terrorist contravenes any provision Enhanced
4 of 1884. of, or any rule made under the Explosives Act, 1884 or the Explosive Substances Act, Penalties.
6 of 1908. 1908 or the Inflammable Substances Act, 1952 or the Arms Act, 1959, or is in unauthorised
20 of 1952 . : . ’
54 of 1959 possession of any bomb, dynamite or hazardous explosive substance or other lethal
weapon or substance capable of mass destruction or biological or chemical substance
of warfare, he shail, notwithstanding anything contained in any of the aforesaid Acts
or the rules made thereunder, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also
be liable to fine.
. (2) Any person who, with intent to aid any terrorist, attempts to contravene or
abets, or does any act preparatory to contravention of. any provision of any law or rule
specified in sub-section (/), shall be deemed to have contravened that provision
under sub-section (/) and the provisions of that sub-section in relation to such
person, have effect subject to the modification that the reference to “imprisonment for
life” therein shall be construed as a reference to “imprisonment for ten years”.
CHAPTER V
_FORFEITURE OF PROCEEDS OF TERRORISM
24. (1) No person shall hold or be in possession of any proceeds of terrorism. Forfeiture of
(2) Proceeds of terrorism, whether held by a terrorist or by any other person and reer f
whether or not such terrorist or other person is prosecuted or convicted for any offence
under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, shall be liable to be forfeited to the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be, in the manner provided under this Chapter.
25. (/) If an officer investigating an offence committed under Chapter IV or Powers of
Chapter VI, has reason to believe that any property in relation to which an investiga- ibang
tion is being conducted, represents proceeds of terrorism, he shall, with the Prior Designated
approval in writing of the Director General of the Police of the State in which such Authority
property is situated, make an order seizing such property and where it is not practi- ete
cable to seize such property, make an order of attachment directing that such property of Designated
shall not be transferred or otherwise dealt with except with the prior permission ofthe Authority.
officer making such order, or of the Designated Authority before whom the property
seized or attached is produced and a copy of such order shall be served on the person
concerned.

[PAGE 6]
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA ‘EXTRAORDINARY [PaxriI—
(2) The investigating officer shall duly inform the Designated Authority within
forty-eight hours of the seizure or attachment ‘of such property. :
(3) The Designated Authority before whom the seized or attached property is
produced shall either confirm or revoke the order of seizure or attachment so issued
within a period of sixty days from the date:of such production: .
Provided that an.opportunity of making a representation by the person whose
property is‘being seized or attached shall be given.
(4) In the case of immovable property attached by the investigating officer, it
‘shall be deemed to have been produced ‘before the Designated Asthority, when the
‘investigating officer notifies his report and places # at the disposal of the Designated -
(5) The investigating officer may seize and detain any cash to which this .
‘Chapter applies if he tas reasonable grounds for sespecting that—
(a) it is intended to be used for the purposes of terrorism, or
(6) it forms the whole on part of the resources of a terrorist organisation:
Provided that the cash seized under this sub-section by the investigating
officer shall be released within a period of forty-eight hours beginaing with the tre
when i is seized unless the matter iavolwing the cash is before the Designated ,
Authority and such Authority passes an order allowing its retention beyond
Explanation. —For the purpeses of this sub-section, “cash” means—
{a) coins or notes in any currency;
(8) postal orders;
{c) traveller’s cheques; ;
. (d) banker’s drafts; and
(e) such other monetary instruments as the Central Government or, as the
case may be, the State Government may specify by an order made in writing.
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Designated Authority may
prefer an appeal to the court within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of
the order, and the court may either confirm the order of attachment of property or
seizure so made or revoke such order and release the property.
Court to order 26. Where any property is seized or attached on the ground that it constitutes
forfeiture of proceeds of terrorism and the court confirms the order in this regard under sub- procecdés of section (6) of section 25, it may order forfeiture of such property, whether or not the
, person from whose possession it is seized or attached, is prosecuted in a court for an
offence under Chapter IV or Chapter VI. .
Issue of show 27. (1) No order forfeiting any proceeds of terrorism shail be made under
cause notice section 26 unless the person holding or in possession of such proceeds is given a
before of notice in writing informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to forfeit the
proceeds of proceeds of terrorism and such person is given an opportunity of making a representerrorism. tation in writing within such reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against
the grounds of forfeiture and is also given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in .
the matter. .
(2) No order of forfeiture shail be made under sub-section (/), if such person
establishes that he is a bona fide transferee of such proceeds for value without
knowing that they represent proceeds of terrorism.

[PAGE 7]
Sec. E] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7

(3 It shalf be competent for the court to make an order in respect of property
seized or attached,—

{a) directing it to be sold if it is a: perishable property and the provisions
of section 459 of the Code shall, as nearly as may-be practicable, apply to the net
proceeds of such sale;

(6) nominating any officer of the Central Government or the State

Government, in the case of any other property, to perform: the functiom of the

Administrator of such property subject to such conditions as may be specified

by the court.

28. (/) Any person aggrieved by an order of forfeiture under section: 26 may, Appeal.
within one month from the date of the receipt of such order, appeal ta the High Court
within whose jurisdiction, the court, which passed: the order appealed against, is
situated.

(2) Where an order under section 26 is modified or annulled by the High Court or

. where in a prosecution instituted for any offence under Chapter [V ar Chapter VI, the
person against whom an order of forfeiture has been made under section. 26 is acquitted, such property shall be returned to him and in either case if it is not possible for any
reason to return the forfeited property, such person shall be paid the price therefor as
if the property had been sold to the Central Government with reasonable interest
calculated from the day of seizure of the property and such price shall be determined in
the manner prescribed. :

29. The order of forfeiture made under this Chapter by the court, shall not pre- Order of forvent the infliction of any other punishment to which the person affected thereby is feiture not to
liable under Chapter 1V or Chapter VI. interfere with

other punishments.

30. (/) Where any claim is preferred or any objection is made to the seizure or Claims by
attachment of any property under section 25 on the ground that such property is not third party.
liable to seizure or attachment, the Designated Authority before whom such property
is produced, shall proceed to investigate the claim or objection:

Provided that no such investigation shall be made where the Designated
Authority considers that the claim or objection is designed to cause unnecessary ~
delay.

(2) Where an appeal has been preferred under sub-section (6) of section 25 and
any claimant or objector establishes that the property specified in the notice issued
under section 27 is not liable to be forfeited under this Chapter, the said notice shall be
withdrawn or modified accordingly. ;

31. The Designated Authority, acting under the provisions of this Chapter, shall Powers of
have all the powers of a civil court required for making a full and fair inquiry into the Designated
matter before it. . Authority.

32. Where, after the issue ofan order under section 25 or issue ofa notice under —_ Certain transsection 27, any property referred to in the said order or notice is transferred by any fers to be null
mode whatsoever, such transfer shall, for the purpose of the proceedings under this "4 void.
Chapter, be ignored and if such property is subsequently forfeited, the transfer of such
property shall be deemed to be null and void.

33. (/) Where any person is accused of an offence under Chapter IV or Chapter ‘Forfeiture of
VI, it shall be open to the court to pass an order that all or any of the properties, Property of
movable or immovable or both, belonging to him, shall, during the period of such trial, ¢¢"™ain
be attached, if not already attached under this Chapter. Persons.

(2) Where a person has been convicted of any offence punishable under
Chapter IV or Chapter VI, the court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, by
order in writing, declare that any property, movable or immovable or both, belonging to

‘ the accused and specified in the order, shall stand forfeited to the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be, free from all encumbrances.

[PAGE 8]
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
Company to 34, Where any share in a company stand forfeited to the Central Government or
waster the State Government, as the case may be, under this Chapter, then, the company
Government. shail, on receipt of the order of the court, notwithstanding anything contained in the
Companies Act, 1956, or the articles of association of the company, forthwith register 1 of 1956.
the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, as the transferee
of such share.
. CHAPTER VI
TERRORIST ORGANISATIONS
Amendment 35. (1) The Central Government may, by order, in the Official Gazette,—
f Schedule, an
etc. we (a) add an organisation to the Schedule;
(4) add also an organisation to the Schedule, which is identified as a ”
terrorist organisation in a resolution adopted by the Security Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations, to combat international .
terrorism;
(c) remove an organisation from the Schedule;
(d) amend the Schedule in some other way.
(2) The Central Government shall exercise its power under clause (a) of subsection (/) in respect of an organisation only if it believes that it is involved in terrorism.
(3) For the purposes of sub-section (2), an organisation shall be deemed to be
involved in terrorism if it—
(a) commits or participates in acts of terrorism, or
(5) prepares for terrorism, or
(c) promotes or encourages terrorism, or
(a) is otherwise involved in terrorism.
Denotification 36. (7) An application may be made to the Central Government for the exercise of
of a terrorist its power under clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 35 to remove an organisation
organisation. from the Schedule.
(2) An application under sub-section (/)may be made by— :
(a) the organisation, or
(8) any person affected by inclusion of the organisation in the Schedule
~as a terrorist organisation.
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for admission and
disposal of an application made under this section.
(4) Where an application under sub-section (/) has been rejected the applicant
may apply for a review to the Review Committee constituted by the Central Government -
“ “under sub-section (/) of section 37 within one month from the date of receipt of the
order of such refusal by the applicant. :
(5) The Review Committee may allow an application for review against rejection .
to remove an organisation from the Schedule, if it considers that the decision to reject
was flawed when considered in the tight of the principles applicable on an application
for judicial review. .
(6) Where the Review Committee allows review under sub-section (5) by or in
respect of an organisation, it may make an order to such effect.
(7) Where an order is made under sub-section (6), the Central Government shail,
as soon as the certified copy of the order is received by it, make an order removing the
organisation from the Schedule.
Review 37. (1) The Central Government shall constitute one or more Review
Committees Committees for the purposes of section 36.

[PAGE 9]
MON LIVET =
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
(2) Every such Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such other
members not exceeding three and Possessing such qualifications as may be prescribed.
(3) A Chairperson of the Committee shall be a Person who is, or has been, a
Judge of a High Court, who shall be appointed by the Central Government and in the
case of appointment of a sitting Judge, the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the
concerned High Court shall be obtained.
38. (/) A person, who associates himself, or professes to be associated, witha Offence
terrorist organisation with intention to further its activities, commits an offence relating tei
: : . «atin. membership
telating to membership of a terrorist organisation: of a terrorist
Provided that this sub-section shall not apply where the person charged is able 7ganisation.
to prove—
(a) that the organisation was not declared as a terrorist organisation at the
time when he became a member or began to profess to be a member; and
(4) that he has not taken part in the activities of the organisation at any
time during its inclusion in the Schedule as a terrorist organisation.
(2) A person, who commits the offence relating to membership of a terrorist
organisation under sub-section (/), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ten years, or with fine, or with both.
39. (1) A person commits the offence relating to support given to a terrorist Offence
organisation,— relating to
support given
(a) who, with intention to further the activity ofa terrorist organisation,— to a terrorist
. . .. organisation.
() invites support for the terrorist Organisation, and
(i) the support is not or is not restricted to provide money or other
Property within the meaning of section 40; or
(6) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation,
arranges, manages or assists in arranging or managing a meeting which he .
knows is—
(4 to support the terrorist organisation, or
(ii) to further the activity of the terrorist organisation, or :
(iii) to be addressed by a person who associates or professes to be
associated with the terrorist organisation; or
(c) who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation,
addresses a meeting for the purpose of encouraging support for the terrorist
organisation or to further its activity.
(2) A person, who commits the offence relating to support given to a terrorist
organisation under sub-section (/) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
not exceeding ten years, or with fine, or with both.
40.(/) Aperson commits the offence of raising fund for a terrorist Organisation, Offence of
who, with intention to further the activity of a terrorist organisation, — raising fund
for a terrorist
(a) invites another person to provide money or other Property, and —_ organisation.
intends that it should be used, or has reasonable cause to suspect that it might
be used, for the purposes of terrorism; or
(4) receives money or other Property, and intends that it should be used,
or has reasonable cause to suspect that it might be used, for the purposes of
terrorism; or

[PAGE 10]
10_THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY_PAIT=
(c) provides money or other property, and knows, or has reasonable
cause to suspect, that it would or might be used for the purposes of terrorism.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub-section, a reference to provide
money or other property includes of its being given, lent or otherwise made available,
whether or not for consideration.
(2) Aperson, who commits the offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation
under sub-section (/), shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding
fourteen years, or with fine, or with both. .
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS .
Continuance 4]. An association shall not be deemed to have ceased to exist by reason only :
of associa- of any formal act of its dissolution or change of name but shall be deemed to continue .
ton. so long as any actual combination for the purposes of such association continues
between any members thereof.
Power to 42. The Central Government may, by noti fication in the Official Gazette, direct that
delegate all or any of the powers which may be exercised by it under section 7, or section 8, or
both, shall, in such circumstances and under such conditions, ifany, as may be specified
in the notification, be exercised also by any State Government and the State Government
may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by order in writing, direct
that any power which has been directed to be exercised by it shall, in such circumstances
and under such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the direction, be exercised by
any person subordinate to the State Government as may be specified therein.
Officers 43. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no police officer —
tent t
in vestigate ° (a) in the case of the Delhi Special Police Establishment, constituted
offences under sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Delhi-Special Police Establishment Act,
er y 1946, below the rank ofa Deputy Superintendent of Police or a police officer of 25 of 1946.
ea vL | equivalent rank;
(5) in the metropolitan areas of Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and Ahmedabad
and any other metropolitan area notified as such under sub-section (/) of section 8 of the Code, below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner of Police;
(c) in any case not relatable to clause (a) or clause (b), below the rank of
a Deputy Superintendent of Police ora police officer of an equivalent rank,
shall investigate any offence punishable under Chapter IV or VI.
Protection of 44. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the proceedings under
witnesses. this Act may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, be held in camera if the court so .
desires.
(2) Acourt, if on an application made by a witness in any proceeding before it or .
by the Public Prosecutor in relation to such witness or on its own motion, is satisfied that
the life of such witness is in danger, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, take
such measures as it deems fit for keeping the identity and address of such witness secret.
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of ,
sub-section (2), the measures which a court may take under that sub-section may
include— ,
(a) the holding of the proceedings at a place to be decided by the court,
(b) the avoiding of the mention of the name and address of the witness in
its orders or judgments or in any records of the case accessible to public;

[PAGE 11]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY It
— St Oe oo eee
ooo
(c} the issuing of any directions for securing that the identity and address
of the witness are not disclosed;
(d@) a decision that it is in the public interest to order that all or any of the
proceedings pending before such a court shall not be published in any manner.
(4) Any person who contravenes any decision or direction issued under subsection (3) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
45. No court shall take cognizance of any offence— Cognizance of
offences.
() under Chapter HI without the previous sanction of the Central
Government or any officer authorised by the Central Government in this behalf:
(ii) under Chapters IV and VI without the previous sanction of the Central
Government or, as the case may be, the State Government, and where such

offence is committed against the Government of a foreign country without the

previous sanction of the Central Government.

1 of 1872. 46. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or Admissibility
any other law for the time being in force, the evidence collected through the inter- of evidence
ception of wire, electronic or oral communication under the provisions of the Indian through the

13 of 1885 Telegraph Act, 1885 or the Information Technology Act, 2000 or any other law forthe interception

21 of 2000 time being in force, shall be admissible as evidence against the accused in the court of commuduring the trial of a case: nications.

* Provided that the contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication
intercepted or evidence derived therefrom shall not be received in evidence or
otherwise disclosed in any trial, hearing or other proceeding in any court unless each
accused has been furnished with a copy of the order of the competent authority under
the aforesaid law, under which the interception was directed, not less than ten days
before trial, hearing or proceeding:

Provided further that the period of ten days may be waived by the judge trying
the matter, if he comes to the conclusion that it was not possible to furnish the accused
with such order ten days before the trial, hearing or proceeding and that the accused
shall not be prejudiced by the delay in receiving such order.

47. (7) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no proceeding taken Bar of
under this Act by the Central Government or the District Magistrate or any officer Jurisdiction.
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government or the District Magistrate, shall be
called in question in any civil court in any suit or application or by way of appeal or .
revision, and no injunction shall be granted by any civil court or other authority in
respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or
under this Act.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), no civil court or
other authority shail have, or be entitled to exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or
authority in relation to the matters referred to in section 36.

48. The provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder shall have Effect of Act
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment and rules, etc.,
other than this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other with other
than this Act. enactments.

49. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against— Protection of

(a) the Central Government or a State Government or any officer or in good faken
authority of the Central Government or State Government or District Magistrate

or any officer authorised in this behalf by the Government or the District

Magistrate or any other authority on whom powers have been conferred under

this Act, for anything which is in good faith done or purported to be done in ‘

pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder; and

[PAGE 12]
, 12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Part li
ee
(8) any serving or retired member of the armed forces or para-military
forces in respect of any action taken or purported to be taken by him in good
faith, in the course of any operation directed towards combating terrorism.
Saving. 50. Nothing in this Act shall affect the jurisdiction exercisable by, or the procedure applicable to, any cotft or other authority under any law relating to the navy,
army or air force or other armed forces of the Union.
Impounding of 51. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
eanasral end force, the passport and the arms licence of a person, who is charge-sheeted for having
arms Tienes © committed any offence under this Act, shail be deemed to have been impounded for
person chargesheeted under such period as the court may deem fit. >
the Act. ‘ .
Power to make 52. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make :
rules. rales for carrying out the provisions of this Act. ‘
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
. (a) the service of notices or orders issued or made under this Act and the
. manner in which such notices or orders may be served, where the person to be
served is a corporation, company, bank or other association;
(6) the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal or a District Judge in
holding any inquiry or disposing of any application under this Act;
(c) determination of the price of the forfeited property under sub-section
(2) of section 28;
(d) the procedure for admission and disposal of an application under subsection (3) of section 36;
; (e) the qualifications of the members of the Review Committee under subsection (2) of section 37; and
() any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.
Orders and — 53. Every order and every rule made by the Central Government under this Act
ns to be nid shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
Houses of it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
Parliament. or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the order or rule or both Houses agree that the
order or rule should not be made, the order or rule shall thereafter have effect only in .
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such :
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that order or rule.
«

[PAGE 13]
See. 1 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13
THE SCHEDULE
[See sections 2¢/)(m) and 35]
TERRORIST ORGANISATIONS
I. BABBAR KHALSA INTERNATIONAL.
2 KHALISTAN COMMANDO FORCE.
3. KHALISTAN ZINDABAD FORCE. ‘
4. INTERNATIONAL SIKH YOUTH FEDERATION.
5. LASHKAR-E-TAIBA/PASBAN-E-AHLE HADIS.
6. JAISH-E-MOHAMMED/TAHRIK-E:FURQAN,
7. HARKAT-UL-MUJAHIDEEN/HARKAT-UL-ANSAR/HARKAT-UL-JEHAD-E-
ISLAMI.
8. HIZB-UL-MUJAHIDEEN/HIZB-UL-MUJAHIDEEN PIR PANJAL REGIMENT.
9. AL-UMAR-MUJAHIDEEN. ‘
10. JAMMU AND KASHMIR ISLAMIC FRONT.
11. UNITED LIBERATION FRONT OF ASSAM (ULFA).
12. NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC FRONT OF BODOLAND (NDFB).
13. PEOPLE’S LIBERATION ARMY (PLA).
14. UNITED NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT (UNLP).
15. PEOPLE’S REVOLUTIONARY PARTY OF KANGLEIPAK (PREPAK).
16. KANGLEIPAK COMMUNIST PARTY (KCP).
17. KANGLEI YAOL KANBA LUP (KYKL).
18. MANIPUR PEOPLE’S LIBERATION FRONT (MPLF).
19. ALL TRIPURA TIGER FORCE.
20. NATIONAL LIBERATION FRONT OF TRIPURA.
21. LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (LTTE).
22. STUDENTS ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF INDIA.
23. DEENDAR ANJUMAN.
24. COMMUNIST PARTY OF INDIA (MARXIST-LENINIST)}—PEOPLE’S
WAR, ALLITS FORMATIONS AND FRONT ORGANISATIONS.
25. MAOIST COMMUNIST CENTRE (MCC), ALL ITS FORMATIONS AND
FRONT ORGANISATIONS.
26. AL BADR.
27, JAMIAT-UL-MUJAHIDDEN. “
28. AL-QAIDA.
' "29. DUKHTARAN-E-MILLAT (DEM).

[PAGE 14]
14 THE ‘GAZETTE ‘OF INDIA EXTRAORDINAR [Part Il-—-Sec.1]
30. TAMIL NADU LIBERATION ARMY (TNLA).
31. TAMIL NATIONAL RETRIEVAL TROOPS (TNRT).
32. AKHIL BHARAT NEPALI EKTA SAMAJ (ABNES).’.
Repea! and ; ‘8. (1) The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Ordinance, 2004 ishereby Ord. 2 of 2004.
saving. repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
‘ principal Act, as. amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act. .
: ; “8
&
. x
. . T.K. VISWANATHAN,
Secy. to the Govt. of India.
»
Y
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2004.
MGIPMRND--3925Gi(S-1}—01.01.2005. ,