[PAGE 1]
ahaRZT He Sle TeHe-33004/99 g 2 a _REGD.NO.D.L.-33004/99
(a)
Che Gazette of Gndia
SATATCOT
EXTRAORDINARY
art II —@vs 3 —30-WVE (i)
PART I[—Section 3—Sub-section (i)
Witter & wenrfera
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
a 530] we faecit, area, steer 31, 2006 anf 9, 1928
No. 530] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2006/KARTIKA 9, 1928
qe aarera
afert
. ag feet, 30 atRER, 2006
ALL, 680(31).— date UOTE aval waters aiff, 2005 (2005 aT 53) # ER
75 Gt STE (1) S wre usa saat suare (2) S Ss (S) amt waa efseat wr war
ae ey, fafafed faa wnt & seq:
1, Cferer ara site wea - (1) sa Praat or fener ara aaa wae (wefte sirer wader .
deur) faa, 2006 & |
(2) 3 word 4 sae ver ot athe at aga a |
2. afeaand - (1) g4 fran 4, oa aw f dal @ aren sree a a
(@) “afefrara” 8 anger wae af@f, 2005 (2005 a 53) afta? ;
(@) “era? O ent Farr ar wrote aftita e
(7) “ortrem Pere” 8 data eer ae Aged tem a adores
Prese afta & ;
(3) “aft fore” & erst or at fora afta ae ;
(@ “tena? 8 asia aver wdert teers afta & ;
, (a) “sree” @ tert wT anzet afta a;
(8) “afea” & eens site eet Prera or afta afta &
(@) “err ® afar at arr afta 2 -
(9) “ormrrafe” 8 art fart er sa warafe afta 2;
3466 GI/2006 a) .

[PAGE 2]
2 THE GAZETTEOF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY - [Pat See. 3(i))
(a) sonener” & Sea Gr wares afta & ;
(2) wa wad oie uel a, ot sai wgad & ate ga Pam a ofenfta ad & farg
afafrar 4 ufefta & ae ef ett ot afatran a mar: stat et
3. TRU at aeern-(1) ders 4 Prafafed wae ett, seq:
(i) Sata aor & Ta Hares a ary ar aE at foTET sree WaT TR
meet Praaot & sik ut wes seat erm ;
(Gi) = wsdta orftrareor ar Soret GY eI HT Vea ST UoTeReT SIT;
(iv) wate orfenket aa ar see seta ata wor o se dates a feat
Ol ARATTG ARG Wa oi Ufaa, fora svar wees ue weafre Paavo & yes ;
(v) @3tr wer G va wares a fem a aa, aRa Be a Ufa, -
(vi) data wer & ve dara a art a seem, aA TER HI Uae, PRET
(vii) asta wer d ve dare om Ram oT aE, mG He oT Ufa,
fire faes-ort ax werafre Priao @ ue ;
(viii) ota wor G va Fare a fem a aR, ARG Ber a waa,
(ix) 3a Wer S va Aare w fet a aR, ARG Tea aT faa, forTaT
fasra afk whehhrat we werafia friar @ aaa ;
(x) daa wer é ve trae w fa ao ARES, ARG URE wT Ufa, ore
Ta, wat Ww wemafte Pra %, wea ;
(xi) Ole tor S Ge tates a feat ws ARES, ARG WOR St Ufea, forra
(xii) Say Wor S ve Aaa a fem Sr Aas, AA ae ST WA.
forret arafse fr@ra we wemafie Preiao @ wea ;
(xiii) Ota wer d ve areas at farm a fewer snver der we WeTEPtar
Paam %, ame wader 8 waffa aed URE oT, aenferfa, afia at fats afta a
aR uted a dyad afaa, wes ; oo

[PAGE 3]
i
- (xxxiv) fafescat ar carer teens 8 uo wy ;
(xxxv) WES sve WaT WRIA aT Yor WIG ;
(xxxvi) Hear aT orate Pega, we | ~
(2) Oy wor tem &, wey veel 8 fr, weal a Wh Aa 4, fire ae
Sfra aaa, aah weit |
(3) wsfrs me aT Siew tee & fa wee witiew @ wae aw afte
Ba |
(4) sw uuriaa F cher vada & sad fara -
(®) Teas G ues WaeT aH Varah daaw wer} Wada de Ge ve HT Me
oral & fora sna ut de Ver Gare ; sik
(@ Wer & WARE wer a sa vas ahaa wH arta S a at
at ert : :
Wy te S ues wees S fy wae Wa wae S ug Y Gala ua aT
warmed eaters fey GA aa ue We SAT WEA |
4, Rferal ar aa orn - den } (Ger weed S fi) wee F arg, yy aT
arr oro & eg wht Rigrat teh Riera SA S oearq woreite ay Arafat ER wet
arett |
5. Wem @ afta - dere son weet aaa Ta wa we oak TH BW
een wt aaa aor ant Pad fey a six vest aftasa A oRaK @ Ware G
tae A ouima & 0S raat or ges HT a Ue eRe aR sftenfa fey wre sik
Tea ea te at w ak WS wr Ww ahaa Gem sik sot afraera A
ora & dager & daa 4 ofa S Ce Past of oem ae a fahaat aa
aaa fay arg |
6. Went a writ fora - (1) tem & wt fro 4 Pefaftsr waar er,
(i) Wa oR aor SoTeRA GA Ue eT VT;
(i) Fa TER F se saree a MrT a ARTIS AA RR ot Ufa foray
al Fae WW pera Peat 2 al woraet em, wes;

[PAGE 4]
(ii) Gra war 3 sa saree a fet 4, fewer ae weer Ww yeTEe
Pao 3 soar wert 8 afd ARG ERO oT venfefe, afea wm fave wie a7
om afta a aged Ufea, wT ;
(iv) GSI Wer S a Hares TW AAMT GS ARATG ARG HOR G1 Ufaa aay
ar I erate Privo @ wea;
(v) wetta wiftraeor on, wenfeefa, afera ar aoe ufaa, vet ;
(vi) Fa WOR S Ta dares a fea &, foray sree wader oR weTEhre Praise
2 fta 8 dafta ora URE or, senha, aoe afd ok far woreMR UW dyad
afag afte faa ween ver ;
(vii) Wa Gen or waa eet ae ter o weed FA vo aa ;
(viii) faxaftenera or nfaPirea Set ae Ya War ; ‘
(ix) aRde seh Prat cert sie area weer teera ar ofaPiea Ge aet TRIM Fi
awa ;
(x) fears ate stented teen an wfatattica Het Ger HRI HT Uo AT;
ae anda off ager wReq of uff we aa tem & wan Fa a
ara ; 3k
(xii) TRI a orice Peers, eH |
(2) ret Prat teat at ordanfton afifa ah atte tet afeaet or wart ote Be
pet at oer oat of them, ga Pitre ere ay fei ae, wa wed a
aR Be | ‘
(3) wet Frere arr art eferat @ wart F atte amt pat S orem 4 agqeka at
aM aa aia sik mi Pere & weal at uaa cer wat Reral a ae ay
fa ae enh wt faaat art aa wt ony | ,
7. Wet ot arias Pewa - (4) de o we anita Pere en a oa
ROR ER Prasat fora wre | .
(2) wera a ortnere Pers tena & afta & wa 4 cer tea S uit Pow
@ ws 4 at wT |
8, ordre Rawes at wfara ste gad pa - wer a ae Pern teh
wife ar wart otk 8S Gell or Tara eT at fare arr aa fey we |
[w. a 30/8/2006-rEteA-IIT (a)]
. yay HAG, GyR ataa

[PAGE 5]
[APTI— rs 34) ] UR Hl USA : ARTA :
“MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 30th October, 2006
G.S.R. 680(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (e) of sub-section
(2) read with sub-section (1) of section 75 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 (53 of
2005), the Central Government hereby makes ile following rules, namely:-
1. Short title and commencement.- (1) These rules may be called the Disaster
Management (National Institute of Disaster M.inagement) Rules, 2006.
(2) They shall come into force on th: date of their publication in the Official
Gazette. , ;
2. Definitions.- (1) In these rules, ur ‘ess the context otherwise requires, -
(a) "Act" means the Disaster Management Act, 2005 (53 of 2005);
(b) "chairperson" means the chairperson of the governing body;
; (c) "executive director" means the executive director of the institute appointed by the
Central Government; ~
. (d) "governing body" means the governing body of the institute;
(e) "institute" means the National Institute of Disaster Management;
(f) "president" means the president of the ‘jistitute;
(g) "secretary" means the secretary of the institute and the governing body;
(h) "section" means a section of the Act;
(i) "vice-chairperson" means the vice-cl.airperson of the governing body of the
institute; . :
(j) "vice-president" means the vice-presidcnt of the institute;
(2) Words and expressions used herein aid not defined but defined in the Act shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Act. :
3. Composition of the institute.- (1) Tlie institute shall consist of the following
members, namely: - ;
(i) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government
' having administrative control of disaster management, who shall be the President,
ex officio;
(ii) the Vice-Chairperson of the National Authority who shall be the vice-president,
ex officio;
(iii) | one member of the National Authority;
BY LC GT)e6-2

[PAGE 6]
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY {Part I—Sec. 3(i)] *
ee —

(iv) | Chairperson of the National Executive Committee, that is, the Secretary to the
Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central

. Government having administrative control of disaster management, ex officio;

(v) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department
of the Central Government having administrative control of expenditure, ex
officio;

(vi) _ the Secretary to the. Government of Inwa in charge of the Ministry or Department
of the Central Government having administrative control of agriculture, ex officio;

(vii) _ the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department
of the Central Government having administrative control of External Affairs, ex
officio,

(viii) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department
of the Central Government having administrative control of health, ex officic;

(ix) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department
of the Central Government having administrative control of science and
technology, ex officio;

(x) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department
of the Central Government having ac-ninistrative control of atomic energy, ex
officio;

(xi) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department
of the Central Government having administrative control of space, ex officio;

(xii) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department
of the Central Government having administrative control of ocean development.
ex officio;

(xiii) the Secretary or Special Secretary or Additional Secretary or Joint Secretary, as
the case may be, to the Government of India dealing with disaster management in
the Ministry or Department of the Central Government having administrative
control of disaster management, ex officio;

(xiv) the Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor or Joint Secretary and Financial
Advisor, as the case may be, to the Government of India dealing with finance of
the Ministry or Department of the C2ntral Government having administrative
control of disaster management, ex offi-.io; .

(xv) The Secretary or Additional Secretary, as the case may be, of the National
Disaster Management Authority, ex officio;

(xvi) the Director-General of the National Disaster Response Force, ex officio;

(xvii) the Deputy Chief of Integrated Defence Staff, Doctrine Organisation & Training
(DOT), Head Quarters Integrated Defence Staff. Ministry of Defence ex officio:

(xviii) two Secretaries of State Governments in charge of disaster management; _ ,

. (xix) one vice-chancellor from the universitizs; .
(xx) the Director, Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration.
; Mussorrie; .

[PAGE 7]
[APT — Wes 3(i)] UE FT UTA: AAI 7
" (xxi) _ the Director, Sardar Vallabah Bhai Pate! National Police Academy, Hyderabad:
(xxii) the Director General, India Meteorological Department, ex officio;
(xxiit) two Directors, one each, from any Indian Institute of Management and any
Indian Institute of Technology;
(xxiv) the Chairman of the Central Water Commission, ex officio;
(xxv) the Director of Indian Institute of Public Administration, ex officio;
(xxvi) the Director General of Indian Council of Agriculture Research, ex officio;
(xxvii) one Director General from the Administrative Training Institutes or State
Institutes of Rural Development;
, (xxviii) the Director General of Indian Counci! of Medical Research, ex officio;
(xxix) two eminent persons in the field of disaster management, public administration,
information technology, medicine etc. ;
(xxx) two experts, one each from banking and insurance sector;
(xxxi) two presidents or heads, by whatever name called, from the industry associations
or federations of all-India-level which in the opinion of the Central Government
: are capable of representing the industry, trade or commerce;

_ (xxxil) two presidents or heads, by whatever name called, from non-governmental
organisations which in the opinion of the Central.Government are active and
effective in the disaster management activities, or are capable of representing such
activities; ,

(xxxiii)one head from science and technology institutions;
(xxxiv)one head from medical or health institutions;
(xxxv)one professor of the National Institute of Disaster Management;
(xxxvi) the Executive Director of the Institute, ex officio.
(2) The Central Government shall nominate the members of the institute, other than
the ex officio members in such manner.as it may consider appropriate. —
(3) The Vice-Chairperson of the National Authority shall nominate the member of the :
National Authority for the institute. .
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this sub-rule, the term of office of -
' (a) an ex officio member of the institute shall continue so long as he holds the
office by virtue of which he is such a member; and :
(b), | anominated member of the institute shall be two years from the date of his
nomination: ,

[PAGE 8]
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Paxr See. 34)
Provided that a member other than aa ex officio member of the institute. may

resign from the office of such member, by writing under his hand addressed to the
Central Government, but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by
that Government. .
4. Filling up of vacancies.-All vacancies by reason of resignation, death or
otherwise among members (other than ex officio members) of the Institute shall be filled
as soon as may be after the occurrence of the vacancy by a fresh nomination.
5. Meetings of the institute.- The institute shall hold its first meeting at such time
and place as may be appointed by. the Central Government and.observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at the first meeting-as may be laid down
by that Government and thereafter the institute shall meet at such times and places and
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as
may be determined by regulations.

6. Governing body of the institute.- (1) The Governing body of the institute shall

consist of the following members, namely:- .. :

(i) The Vice-Chairperson of the National Authority .who -shall be’ the
chairperson, ex officio; ‘ ;

(ii) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having administrative control of

disaster management, who shall be the vice-chairperson,ex officio; - oO

(iii) the Secretary or Special Secretary or Additional Secretary or Joint
Secretary, as the case may be, to the Government of India dealing with
disaster management in the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control of disaster management. ex
officio;

; (iv) the Secretary to the Government of India in-charge of the Ministry or
Department of the Central Government having administrative control. of
expenditure, ex officio;

‘ (v) the Secretary or Additional Secretary, as the case may be, of the National
Authority; ex officio; . ,

[PAGE 9]
“MMM GUS 3(i)] FT BT USAT: STATA 9
(vi) the Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor or Joint Secretary and
Financial Advisor, as the case raay be, to the Government of India dealing
with finance of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government
having administrative control of disaster management, ex officio;
(vii) one member from amongst the members of the institute representing the
State Governments;
(viii) one member of the institute representing the university,
(ix) - two members of the institute representing the Indian Institute of :
Technology and the Indian Insticute of Management,
(x) one: member of the institute representing a science and technology
institution; ;
(xi) | two members from amongst the members of the institute representing the
Department of Space, the Department of Atomic Energy, the Department
of Science and Technology, the Central Water Commission and the
“Indian Council of Agriculture Research; and
(xii) the executive director of the institute, ex officio.
(2) The governing body shall be the executive committee of the institute and
shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as the institute may, by
regulations made in this behalf, confer or impose upon it.
(3) The procedure to be followed in the exercise of its powers and
performance of its functions by the governing body, and the term of office of, and
the manner of filling up vacancies, among the members of the governing body,
shall be such as may be made by regulations. . 7
7. Executive Director of the institute.- (1) There shall be an Executive
Director of the institute who shall be appointed by the Central Government.
(2) The Executive Director of the institute shall act as the Secretary to the
institute as well as the governing body of the institute.
8. Powers and functions of the Executive Director .- The Executive
Director of the institute shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as
may be made by regulations.
: (F. No. 30/8/2006-NDM-III(A)]
oo . PRABHANSHU KAMAL, Jt. Secy.
3466 GIJe6-3