[PAGE 1]
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

NOTIFICATION

New Delhi, the 1st October, 1962.

G.S.R.No.1328 – In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 5 of the President’s
1*(Emoluments) and Pension Act, 1951 (30 of 1951) the Central Government hereby
makes the following rules namely :-

1. Short title and commencement : (1) These rules may be called the President’s
Pension Rules, 1962.

2 Definitions : In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires –

(a) ‘retired President’ means a person who has ceased to hold office as
the President of India either by the expiration of his term of office
or by resignation of his office;

(b) ‘secretarial staff’ means any person or persons who may be
employed by the retired President in connection with secretariat
work;

(c) ‘medical attendance and treatment’ include medical consultation,
cost of medicines, clinical and pathological tests, other methods of
examination and surgical operations, which the retired President
may require;

(d) ‘medical attendant’ means any registered medical practitioner
practicing any system of medicine;

(e) ‘regular medical attendant’ means a medical attendant who may be
nominated by the retired President for regular medical attendance
and treatment;

(f) ‘travelling expenses’ mean –

(i) in the case of Government medical officers, such travelling
and other allowances as may be admissible to them under
the rules of their service; and

(ii) in the case of persons other than Government medical
officers, expenditure incurred on travel not exceeding the

1* ( ) Added vide MHA Notification No. 1/2/86-M&G dated 9-4-1986 [GSR No.613(E)]

[PAGE 2]
amount admissible to a Class I Government servant of the
highest grade.

2@ 3. (1) 3${(a) A retired President shall be entitled to secretarial staff
consisting of a Private Secretary, an Additional Private Secretary, a Personal
Assistant and two Peons and shall be paid actual charges incurred by him for
the maintenance of such secretarial staff;

(b) during each financial year, an amount not exceeding 4[Rs.1,00,000/-
(Rupees one lakh only)] shall be paid to every retired President towards the actual
charges incurred by him on account of office expenses;}

(c) all expenses referred to in clauses (a) and (b) of this sub-rule shall be borne by
the Central Government;

(d) a retired President shall be entitled without payment of rent to the use of a
furnished residence anywhere in India at the choice of the retired President, without
payment of water and electricity charges for the remainder of his life;

(e) at places where Government owned accommodation is allotted to a retired
President, the size of the residence shall be comparable to a residence allotted to a
Minister in the Union Council of Ministers and if the highest type of Government
residence available at a particular place is less in size than a residence allotted to a
Minister in the Union Council of Ministers, the highest type of accommodation available
at that place shall be allotted to the ex-President. At places where suitable Government
residence is not available for allotment to a retired President, the size of residence to be
taken on lease to be provided to a retired President, shall have a living area not exceeding
2000 square feet;

(f) the value of the furniture and electrical appliances provided free of rent in a
residence allotted to the retired President shall not exceed the monetary limit prescribed
for supply of furniture and electrical appliances provided free of rent in a residence
allotted to a Minister in the Union Council of Ministers;

3${(g) a retired President shall be entitled to the use of two telephones (one for
internet and broadband connectivity) at his residence, one mobile phone with national
roaming facility and a motor car, free of charge and shall be paid actual charges incurred
by him on the maintenance thereof;}

Provided that he may use his own motor car in lieu of which he shall be paid, every
month, car allowance equal to the cost of 250 litres of petrol plus salary admissible to a
person, from time to time, holding the post of a Driver in the Government of India.

2 @ Substituted vide Notification No.1/5/90-M&G dated 30-7-1990 [GSR No.676(E)]
3 ${} Substituted vide Notification No.10/19/96-M&G dated 10-2.2009 [GSR No. 88(E)]
4 [ ] Substituted vide Notification No.1/1/2016-M&G dated 24.05.2018 [GSR No. 488(E)]

[PAGE 3]
5${(h) in the event of the death of a President in harness or after demitting office,
the surviving spouse shall be entitled, without payment of licence fee, to the use of
furnished residence anywhere in India at the choice of the spouse, without payment of
water and electricity charges for the remainder life;

(i) at places where Government owned accommodation is allotted to the spouse,
the class of accommodation shall be Type VIII and if the highest type of Government
owned accommodation available at a particular place is smaller in size, the highest type
of accommodation available at the place shall be allotted to the spouse;}

6^ [ (j) at places where suitable Government accommodation is not available for
allotment to the surviving spouse, the size of the accommodation to be taken on lease to
be provided for the surviving spouse shall have a living area not exceeding 2000 square
feet;

(k) residential accommodation shall be allotted to the surviving spouse at a place
indicated by him or her, if he or she does not own any accommodation in that particular
place;

(l) the accommodation allotted to the surviving spouse shall be for the exclusive
use of the spouse and the same shall not be transferred to any other person after the death
of the surviving spouse;

(m) the Directorate of Estates shall be responsible for arranging accommodation
for the surviving spouse;]

7*[(n) the surviving spouse of a deceased President shall be entitled to secretarial
staff consisting of a Private Secretary and a Peon and shall be paid in each financial year
an amount not exceeding 8[Rs. 20,000 (Rupees twenty thousand only)] towards the actual
charges incurred by him on account of office expenses;

(o) the surviving spouse of a deceased President shall be entitled to the use of a
telephone at his residence and a motor car, free of charge and shall be paid actual charges
incurred by the spouse on the maintenance thereof:

Provided that the spouse may use his own motor car in lieu of which he shall be paid,
every month, car allowance equal to the cost of 250 litres of petrol plus amount of salary
admissible to a person, from time to time, holding the post of a Driver in the Government
of India;

5 ${} Substituted vide Notification No.10/19/96-M&G dated 10-2-2009 [GSR No. 88(E)]
6 ^ [ ] Added by MHA Notification No.1/1/97-M&G dated 11-8-2000. [GSR No.661(E)]
7 * [ ] Inserted vide Notification No.10/19/96-M&G dated 10-2.2009 [GSR No. 88(E)]
8 [ ] Substituted vide Notification No.1/1/2016-M&G dated 24.05.2018 [GSR No. 488(E)]

[PAGE 4]
(p) the surviving spouse of a deceased President shall be entitled to travel
anywhere in India, in a calendar year to twelve single journeys, by the highest class, by
air, rail or steamer, accompanied by a companion or a relative.]

(2) At the initial appointment of the staff, information regarding the number of
persons employed, their emoluments and the periods of their employment shall be
furnished to the Central Government. All subsequent changes shall also be intimated as
and when they occur.

9#[(3) The amount required by the retired President or the surviving spouse of a
deceased President, as the case may be, for the maintenance of secretarial staff and the
office expenses shall be drawn in the form of simple receipt as and when required.

(4) At the end of each year, a certificate to the effect that the amount drawn has been
expended for the purpose for which it had been drawn, shall be given –

(i) by the retired President or the surviving spouse of a deceased President,
as the case may be, in Form-I; or
(ii) by any person authorised by the retired President or the surviving spouse
of a deceased President, as the case may be, in this behalf in Form-IA,
appended to these rules.]

4. Medical Attendance and Treatment – (1) The retired President shall be entitled
to medical attendance and treatment at his residence, or at the clinic, nursing home or
institution of similar nature of consulting room of the medical attendant, specialist or
practitioner concerned –

7#[(a) by a medical attendant or the regular medical attendant;

(b) by a round the clock personal physician attached to him based on need and
request received from the dignitary; and

(c) by a specialist or medical practitioner not falling under clause (a) or (b):]

Provided that a specialist or medical practitioner or medical attendant other than the
regular medical attendant shall be called from outside the State in which the retired
President is residing; only on the advice of the Director of Medical Services or other
corresponding officer in the State concerned or the officer-in-charge of the principal
Government hospital in the district.

(2) The retired President shall also be entitled to any other expenditure that
may be incurred by him in connection with his treatment by the medical attendant, the
regular medical attendant or the specialist or practitioner referred to in sub-rule (1), as the
case may be.

9 #[ ] Substituted vide Notification No.10/19/96-M&G dated 10-2-2009 [GSR No. 88(E)]

[PAGE 5]
(3) All expenses referred to in sub-rule (1) and (2) in rule 4 shall be borne by
the Central Government on production of a certificate by the retired President in Form-II,
or by any person authorised by him in this behalf in Form-IIA appended to these rules.

5. Hospitals, Nursing Homes and Medical Institutions at which treatment
may be received – A retired President shall also be entitled to medical treatment and
attendance in any hospital, nursing home or medical institution in India. All expenses
incurred in this connection shall be borne by the Central Government.

6. Travelling Expenses – Any travelling expenses incurred by the retired
President or the medical attendant or regular medical attendant or specialist or medical
practitioner in connection with the medical attendance and treatment of the retired
President shall be borne by the Central Government on production of a certificate by the
retired President in Form-III, or any person authorised by him in this behalf in Form-IV,
appended to these rules. In the case of a Government medical officer who may perform
journeys to attend on the retired President, the travelling expenses may be drawn by him
through the usual Government channels. If the officer belongs to a State Government,
the latter may claim reimbursement of the cost from the Central Government.

6A. Power of Attorney - All amounts payable to the retired President under the
provisions of the Presidents Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951 (30 of 1951), and under
the foregoing provisions of these rules may be drawn by or paid to the retired President
himself, or, if he so chooses, drawn by or paid to any person who holds a legally valid
power of attorney to act in his behalf.

10$ [6B. Application of rules 4 to 6A to the spouse of a retired President, etc. –

(1) The provisions of rules 4 to 6A shall, so far as may be, apply to the spouse
of a retired President and the spouse of a person who dies while holding
office of President.

(2) All expenses under this rule, shall be borne by the Central Government on
production of a certificate by the spouse in Form-II or Form-III, as the
case may be, or by any person authorised by such spouse in this behalf in
Form-IIB or Form-IVA, as the case may be, appended to these rules.]

7. Interpretation and removal of difficulty – If any question arises relating to the
interpretation of these rules or any difficulty arises in complying with the provisions of
these rules, it shall be referred to the Central Government in the Ministry of Home
Affairs whose decision thereon shall be final.

8. Saving – Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to prevent the Central
Government from providing to a retired President, his spouse or the spouse of a person
who dies while holding the office of President any facility relating to the medical

10$ [ ] Amended vide MHA Notification No.13/1/76-States dated 28-2-1977.

[PAGE 6]
treatment or attendance or travelling expenses for any journey performed by him or the
spouse which is not authorised by rules 4 to 6B.

FORM – I
[Form of certificate referred to in sub-rule (4) of rule 3]

Certified that the amount of Rs…………………. (Rupees ………………) drawn
by me during the year ending 31st March, ……. Has been expended on the maintenance
of my secretarial staff and the office expenses thereof.

Signature :………………………….
Date :………………………………
Place :………………………………

FORM - II
(Form of certificate referred to in rule 4 and rule 6B)

Certified that the amount of Rs………. (Rupees …………….) drawn by me has
been expended in connection with my medical treatment/attendance/consultation.

Signature : ………………………..
Date : …………………………….
Place : ……………………………

FORM – IIA
(Form of certificate referred to in rule 4)

Certified that the amount of Rs. ……. (Rupees ……………) drawn has been
expended in connection with retired President medical treatment/attendance/consultation.
Signature :………………………..
Date : ……………………………
Place :……………………………

FORM – IIB
[Form of certificate referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 6B]

Certified that the amount of Rs. ………. (Rupees ……….) drawn has been
expended in connection with the medical treatment/attendance/consultation of Shri/
Shrimati ……………………………….. spouse of …………………………………..

Signature :………………………
Designation :……………………
Date :……………………………

[PAGE 7]
Place :……………………………

FORM – IA
[Form of certificate referred to in sub-rule (4) of rule 3]

Certified that the amount of Rs. ………. (Rupees ………….. ) drawn during the
year ending 31st March, ……. Has been expended on the maintenance of retired
President’s secretarial staff and the office expenses thereof.
Signature : ……………………….
Designation : …………………….
Date : ……………………………
Place : ……………………………

FORM – III
(Form of certificate referred to in rule 6)

Certified that the amount of Rs. ………… (Rupees ……… ) drawn by me on
account of travelling expenses has been incurred by me/my medical attendant/specialist/
medical practitioner in connection with medical consultation/attendance/treatment.
Signature : ……………………….
Date : ……………………………
Place : ……………………………

FORM – IV
(Form of certificate referred to in rule 6)

Certified that the amount of Rs. …….. (Rupees …….. ) drawn on account of
travelling expenses has been incurred by the retired President/the retired President’s
medical attendant/specialist/medical practitioner in connection with medical consultation/
attendance/treatment.
Signature : ……………………….
Designation : …………………….
Date : ……………………………
Place : ……………………………

FORM – IVA
[Form of certificate referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 6B]

Certified that the amount of Rs. ……. (Rupees ……… ) drawn on account of
travelling expenses has been incurred by :-

(i) Shri/Shrimati …………………. Spouse of ………………………………

[PAGE 8]
OR

(ii)Medical attendant/specialist/medical practitioner of Shri/Shrimati …………
spouse of …………………. In connection with medical consultation/attendance/
treatment.
Signature : ……………………………..
Designation : …………………………..
Date : ………………………………….
Place : …………………………………

-: oOo :-