[PAGE 1]
| 14.07.11 C.P.A.N. 1270 of 2010
i : +
C.P.A.N. 65 of 2011
With
_ W.P. 32027 ™ of 2008
i Mr. Kamal Dey
; .-..-Petitioner (in person)

Mr. Faroog M. Razaack, Addl. Sol. Gen.

Mr. Uttam Kr. Mazumder

Mr. Debasish Kundu

++..For the Union of India
Mr. Ashok Kumar Banerjee, G.P.
Mr. Sakya Sen
--For the State
Mr. Alok Ghosh
--.For the High Court Authority
The Emblem “Ashoka Chakra’, our national pride, ;
should not be used without the words “Satyameva
ayate” to which our attention has been drawn by Mr.
amal Dey, who is appearing ‘in person’ in the matter as
he petitioner.

It appears that earlier an order was passed on 18%
ecember, 2009 by the Division Bench of this Court
here the Court has specifically directed as follows: -

“the Schedule II under Rule 7 of the
; _ State Emblem of India (Regulation of Use) _

Rules, 2007 made under the State Emblem of

India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Act, 2005

enlists in the Part I, the constitutional =

/ A

[PAGE 2]
be Office notes. reports. Orders or proceedings with signature
authorities and other dignitaries which may
display the Emblem on their cars and in the
Part If, the authorities which may display the
| ’ ‘Ashoka Chakra’ which is a part of the Emblem
on triangular metal plaques on their cars and
5 as such, it is not the category of the vehicle
being used, but the “eednoeilay using the vehicle
is the prime criteria for the consideration of
eligibility for display of the National Emblem.”
Learned Additional Solicitor General appearing on
behalf of the Central Government submitted that he
would file a compliance report with regard to the
directions given by the Court from time to time.
Learned Government Pleader appearing with Mr.
Sakya Sen, Learned Advocate on behalf of the State
authorities has also stated that they have already taken
steps ee matter aiid would also file a compliance
report to that effect. :
Both the Learned Counsel for the Central
Government as well as the State Government submitted
before us that such peiblen: should not be used on rented —
\~ bars. It has been submitted that owner of such rented
: ars are ding such Emblem unauthorisedly and both the /
Central Go ox State Govt authorivies are taking eps to

[PAGE 3]
33:
men Ottice notes. reports. Orders or proceedings with signature

ensure that the Emblem is not misused. Learned Counsel
: appearing for the Central and State Government
authorities have also submitted that they would take
immediate steps in the matter and should ensure that
excepting those persons /authorities who are entitled to
a use the said Emblem, no one including any authority use

such Emblem in any manner whatsoever.

| Mr. Dey, the petitioner in person in the matter
if also pointed out that some of the Offices of the State
authorities are ities using the said Emblem without the
‘ words “Satyameva Jayate”.

- Learned Government Pleader appearing on behalf
of the State authorities submitted that if three weeks time
is granted in the matter, they will ensure that the

=e nauthorised duse of such Emblem without the words
| Satyameva Jayate” is immediately stopped and they will
file a compliance report in respect of the order passed by
is Court within a period of fice weeks from date.
Learned Additional Solicitor General also made the
Same submission before us and prays for time to file a
ompliance report by way of affidavit. : i
However, we allow such prayer to file compliance '
eport, but a sels ame ime we dire pe ap horitie
aN a |

[PAGE 4]
E See
Ps : Office notes. reports. Orders or proceedings with signature

to ensure that there should not be any lapse and/or
default on their part to give effect to the orders already
passed by the Division Bench in this regard.

: We further direct that the persons who are not

‘ entitled under Part II and Part Ill of the Schedule II under
Rule 7 be restrained from using the said Emblem on their
cars forthwith and the authories concerned must ensure
it. ;

; Learned Government Pleader appearing for the
State authorities has specifically stated before us that the
order should be complied with in true spirits and they
would take steps in the matter accordingly and would
ensure that the order is complied with on or before the
next date of hearing. .

We further make it clear that it is the duty of the
State authorities to ining it to the notice of the State
Departments as well as the Central Government
Departments so that the order can be given effect to.

On the prayer of Mr. Dey, appearing as petitioner
im person here, who has pointed out before us certain :
atrocities committed by the police against him in view of
tthe fact that steps have been taken by him to file this
Public Intere itigation’ and to ensure that the person

aA” i :

[PAGE 5]
/ 2753
aa [Ser] ome | Office notes. reports. Orders or proceedings with signature
who are not entitled to use the said Emblem in violation of
the Rules, which include the Office of Director General of
Police and it was because of steps taken by him, he had to
suffer in the hands of the police authorities. It is
submitted by Mr. Dey that he should not be harassed in
the hands of the police authorities by any:means, rather
he submitted that under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India it is the foremost duty of the State authorities to
render all assistance and to ensure the life, security and
livelihood to the citizen of India.
It was because of the petitioner that this Court
became aware cf such fragrant violence and misuse of
National Emblem and there are enough truth in his
petition. The manner in which such National Emblem has
been misused is a matter of shame.
In eae of that, we feel it would be proper for us to
direct the State authorities to ensure the securities and
Safety of the writ petitioner Kamal Dey and it is the duty
of the police authorities to see that he should not suffer in
pny manner whatsoever and all possible measures should
be taken for his safety and security.
A plain copy of this order may be handed over to
carned Government Pleader as well as to Learned
Additional Solicitor General and since they have - ead
me / oe

[PAGE 6]
; ae se] owe | Office notes. reports. Orders or proceedings with signature
submitted before us that they will take all necessary steps
in the matter to ensure the security and safety to Mr. Dey,
we do not think any order need be passed excepting the
| said authority must act properly.

i Before we part, certain Books .and Periodicals
which have been placed before us by Mr. Dey from which
it appears that the Emblem has also been used by them
improperly. The following Books and Periodicals are as
follows :- ;

: WISDOM, International Monthly Digest; Wisdom
Publications, No. 17 (Old No 9), Desika Road
(near Alwarpet), Mulapore, Chennai —- 600 004
(India).
The Sunday Indian (The Nation’s Greatest News
Weekly); Planman Media Pvt. Ltd., 48, Community
Centre, Naraina Vihar Industrial Area, Phase — I,
New Dethi- 110 028.
Jectiax: Bigyan Parichay & Physical Science
“PRANTIK”, 18, Dr. Kartick Bose Street, Kolkata —
700 009 (For Classes VI, VII & VIII) :
Accordingly, we direct that notice should be served

pon them and they must apprise the fact that they will

[PAGE 7]
aa
: d ets
SEs Office notes. reports. Orders or Proceedings with signature
rocate No
eee
ee ae
not use the said Emblem in accordance with Part II of the
Rules as we have stated earlier in our order in any :
manner whatsoever without even the words “Satyameva
Jayate” or the words “Ashoka Chakra’.
We further direct the Central Government and
State authorities that they will take all necessary steps in
the matter to remove the same. A show-cause notice
should be issued to the said Printers and Publishers by
the Registrar-General. The notice should be served and
an they must show cause on the next date of hearing as to
He
ak
x oot sy why steps should not be taken against them for such
N- a2
a violation within a period of three weeks from date which
wot
at we oye BA has been fixed after three weeks.
app?
The matter to appear on 4th August, 2011.
Let photocopy of this order duly countersigned by
Assistant Registrar (Court) be given to the parties on the
Sate Sr ies ee z gas iced
usual undertakings.
: ( PINAKI CHANDRA GHOSE, J.)
jee ( SNe SEN, J. )