[PAGE 1]
RESTRICTED

BSFBSFBSFBSFBSF ACTACTACTACTACT ANDANDANDANDAND RULESRULESRULESRULESRULES

MARCH 2004

RESTRICTED

[PAGE 2]
BSF ACT 1

jftLVªh ua0 Mh0221 REGISTERED NO. 221

HkkjrHkkjrHkkjrHkkjrHkkjr jkti=jkti=jkti=jkti=jkti= dkdkdkdkdk
TheTheTheTheThe GazetteGazetteGazetteGazetteGazette ofofofofof IndiaIndiaIndiaIndiaIndia
vlk/kkj.kvlk/kkj.kvlk/kkj.kvlk/kkj.kvlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY

HkkxHkkxHkkxHkkxHkkx 22222 [k.M[k.M[k.M[k.M[k.M 11111
PART II - SECTION 1

izkf/kdkjizkf/kdkjizkf/kdkjizkf/kdkjizkf/kdkj lslslslsls izdkf”krizdkf”krizdkf”krizdkf”krizdkf”kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

la0la0la0la0la0 59½59½59½59½59½ ubZubZubZubZubZ fnYyhfnYyhfnYyhfnYyhfnYyh lkseokjlkseokjlkseokjlkseokjlkseokj flrEcjflrEcjflrEcjflrEcjflrEcj 2]2]2]2]2] 1968@Hkknz1968@Hkknz1968@Hkknz1968@Hkknz1968@Hkknz 11]189011]189011]189011]189011]1890

No. 59} NEW DELHI, MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1968/BHADRA 11, 1890

blblblblbl HkkxHkkxHkkxHkkxHkkx esaesaesaesaesa fHkUufHkUufHkUufHkUufHkUu i`’Bi`’Bi`’Bi`’Bi`’B la[;kla[;kla[;kla[;kla[;k nhnhnhnhnh tkrhtkrhtkrhtkrhtkrh gSgSgSgSgS ftllsftllsftllsftllsftlls fdfdfdfdfd ;g;g;g;g;g vyxvyxvyxvyxvyx ladyuladyuladyuladyuladyu
dsdsdsdsds :i:i:i:i:i esaesaesaesaesa j[kkj[kkj[kkj[kkj[kk tktktktktk ldsldsldsldslds AAAAA
Separate paging is given to this part in order that it may be
filed as a separate compilation

MINISTRY OF LAW
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 2nd September, 1968/Bhadra 11, 1890 (Saka)

The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the
President on the 2nd September, 1968, and is hereby published for
general information:-

[PAGE 3]
2 BSF ACT

THE BORDER SECURITY FORCE ACT, 1968
No. 47 of 1968
[2nd September, 1968]

An Act to provide for the constitution and
regulation of an Armed Force of the Union for
ensuring the security of the borders of India and
for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth
year of the Republic of India as follows:-

CHAPTER-I

PRELIMINARY

Short title 1. (1) This Act may be called the Border Security
and commencement. Force Act, 1968.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.

Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,-

(a) “active duty”, in relation to a person subject
to this Act, means any duty as a member of
the Force during the period in which such
person is attached to, or forms part of, a unit
of the Force -

(i) which is engaged in operations
against an enemy, or
(ii) which is operating at a picket or
engaged on patrol or other guard duty
along the borders of India,

and includes duty by such person during any period declared
by the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette as a period of active duty with reference to any area

[PAGE 4]
BSF ACT 3

in which any person or class of persons subject to this Act
may be serving;

(b) “battalion” means a unit of the Force
constituted as a battalion by the Central
Government;

(c) “Chief Law Officer” and “Law Officer”
mean, respectively, the Chief Law Officer and
a Law Officer of the Force appointed by the
Central Government;

(d) “civil offence” means an offence which is
triable by a criminal court;

(e) “civil prison” means any jail or place used 9 of 1894.
for the detention of any criminal prisoner
under the Prisons Act, 1894, or under any
other law for the time being in force;

(f) “Commandant”, when used in any provision
of this Act with reference to any unit of the
Force, means the officer whose duty it is
under the rules to discharge with respect to
that unit, the functions of a Commandant in
regard to matters of the description referred
to in that provision;

(g) “criminal court” means a court of ordinary
criminal justice in any part of India;

(h) “Deputy-Inspector General” means a Deputy
Inspector General of the Force appointed
under section 5;

(i) “Director-General” means the Director-General
of the Force appointed under section 5;

(j) “enemy” includes all armed mutineers, armed
rebels, armed rioters, pirates and any person
in arms against whom it is the duty of any
person subject to this Act to take action;

(k) “enrolled person” means an under-officer or
other person enrolled under this Act;

[PAGE 5]
4 BSF ACT

(l) “Force” means the Border Security Force;

(m) “Force custody” means the arrest or
confinement of a member of the Force
according to rules;

(n) “Inspector-General” means the Inspector-
General of the Force appointed under
section 5;

(o) “member of the Force” means an officer, a
subordinate officer, an under-officer or other
enrolled person;

(p) “notification” means a notification published
in the Official Gazette;

(q) “offence” means any act or omission
punishable under this Act and includes a civil
offence;

(r) “officer” means a person appointed or in pay
as an officer of the Force, but does not include
a subordinate officer or an under-officer;

(s) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made
under this Act;

(t) “rule” means a rule made under this Act;

(u) “Security Force Court” means a Court
referred to in section 64;

(v) “subordinate officer” means a person
appointed or in pay as a Subedar-Major, a
Subedar or a Sub-Inspector of the Force;

(w) “superior officer”, when used in relation to a
person subject to this Act, means:-

(i) any member of the force to whose
command such person is for the time being
subject in accordance with the rules;

(ii) any officer of higher rank or class or
of a higher grade in the same class;

[PAGE 6]
BSF ACT 5

and includes when such person is not an officer, a subordinate
officer or an under-officer of higher rank, class or grade;

(x) “under-officer”, means a Head Constable,
Naik and Lance Naik of the Force;
(y) all words and expressions used and not
defined in this Act but defined in the 45 of 1860.
Indian Penal Code shall have the
meanings assigned to them in that Code.

(2) In this Act, references to any law not in force
in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be construed as
references to the corresponding law in force in that State.

3. (1) The following persons shall be subject to this Persons sub-
Act, wherever they may be, namely:- jectAct. to this

(a) officers and subordinate officers; and

(b) under officers and other persons enrolled under this Act.

(2) Every person subject to this Act shall remain
so subject until retired, discharged, released, removed or
dismissed from the force in accordance with the provisions
of this Act and the rules.

[PAGE 7]
6 BSF ACT

CHAPTER-II

CONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE AND
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE
MEMBERS OF THE FORCE

Constitution 4. (1) There shall be an armed force of the Union
of the Force.
called the Border Security Force for ensuring the security of
the borders of India.

(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Force
shall be constituted in such manner as may be prescribed
and the conditions of service of the members of the Force
shall be such as may be prescribed.

Control, di- 5. (1) The general superintendence, direction andrection etc.
control of the Force shall vest in, and be exercised by, the
Central Government and subject thereto and to the provisions
of this Act and the rules, the command and supervision of
the Force shall vest in an officer to be appointed by the Central
Government as the Director-General of the force.

(2) The Director-General shall, in the discharge
of his duties under this Act, be assisted by such number of
Inspectors-General, Deputy Inspectors-General,
Commandants and other officers as may be appointed by the
Central Government.

Enrolment. 6. (1) The persons to be enrolled to the Force, the
mode of enrolment, and the procedure for enrolment shall
be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act
and the rules, every person who has, for a continuous period of
three months, been in receipt of pay as a person enrolled under
this Act and borne on the rolls of the Force shall be deemed to
have been duly enrolled.

Liability for 7. Every member of the Force shall be liable to serve inservice outside India. any part of India as well as outside India.

[PAGE 8]
BSF ACT 7

8. No member of the Force shall be at liberty,- Resignation
and withdrawal from
(a) to resign his appointment during the term of the post.
his engagement; or

(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the
duties of his appointment,

except with the previous permission in writing of the
prescribed authority.

9. Every person subject to this Act shall hold office Tenure of
during the pleasure of the President. service under the Act.

10. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, Termination
the Central Government may dismiss or remove from the ofCentralserviceGov-by
service any person subject to this Act. ernment

11. (1) The Director-General or any Inspector- Dismissal,
General may dismiss or remove from the service or reduce removal or reduction by
to a lower grade or rank or the ranks any person subject to the Director
this Act other than an officer. General and by other officers.
(2) An officer not below the rank of Deputy
Inspector General or any prescribed officer may dismiss or
remove from the service any person under his command other
than an officer or a subordinate officer of such rank or ranks
as may be prescribed.

(3) Any such officer as is mentioned in subsection (2) may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the ranks
any person under his command except an officer or a
subordinate officer.

(4) The exercise of any power under this section
shall be subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules.

12. A subordinate officer, or an under-officer or other Certificate of
enrolled person who is retired, discharged, released, removed termination
of service.
or dismissed from the service shall be furnished by the officer,
to whose command he is subject, with a certificate in the

[PAGE 9]
8 BSF ACT

language which is the mother tongue of such person and also in
Hindi or English language setting forth-

(a) the authority terminating his service;

(b) the cause for such termination; and

(c) the full period of his service in the Force.

Restrictions 13. (1) No person subject to this Act shall, without
respecting
right to form the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government
association, or of the prescribed authority,freedom of
speech, etc.
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way
with, any trade union, labour union, political association or
with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political
associations; or

(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way
with, any society, institution, association or organisation that
is not recognised as part of the Force or is not of a purely
social, recreational or religious nature; or

(c) communicate with the press or publish or
cause to be published any book, letter or other document
except where such communication or publication is in the
bonafide discharge of his duties or is of a purely literary,
artistic or scientific character or is of a prescribed nature.

Explanation:-If any question arises as to whether
any society, institution, association or organisation is of a
purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause
(b) of this sub-section, the decision of the Central
Government thereon shall be final.

(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate
in, or address, any meeting or take part in any demonstration
organised by any body of persons for any political purposes
or for such other purposes as may be prescribed.

[PAGE 10]
BSF ACT 9

CHAPTER-III

OFFENCES

14. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of Offences in
relation to the
the following offences, that is to say:- enemy and
punishable
with death.
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post,
place or guard, committed to his charge or
which it is his duty to defend; or
(b) intentionally uses any means to compel or
induce any person subject to this Act or to
military, naval or air force law to abstain from
acting against the enemy or to discourage such
person from acting against the enemy; or
(c) in the presence of the enemy, shamefully casts
away his arms, ammunition, tools or
equipment or misbehaves in such manner as
to show cowardice; or
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with or
communicates intelligence to, the enemy or
any person in arms against the Union; or
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy with
money, arms, ammunition, stores or supplies
or in any other manner whatsoever; or
(f) in time of active operation against the enemy,
intentionally occasions a false alarm in
action, camp, quarters, or spreads or causes
to be spread reports calculated to create alarm
or despondency; or
(g) in time of action leaves his Commandant or
other superior officer or his post, guard,
picket, patrol or party without being regularly
relieved or without leave; or
(h) having been captured by the enemy or made
a prisoner of war, voluntarily serves with or
aids the enemy; or

[PAGE 11]
10 BSF ACT

(i) knowingly harbours or protects an enemy not
being a prisoner; or

(j) being a sentry in time of active operation
against the enemy or alarm, sleeps upon his
post or is intoxicated; or

(k) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil
the success of the Force or the military, naval
or air forces of India or any forces cooperating therewith or any part of such forces,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be
liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this
Act mentioned.

Offences in 15. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
relation to the
enemy and the following offences, that is to say,not punishable with
death. (a) is taken prisoner or captured by the enemy,
by want of due precaution or through
disobedience of orders, or wilful neglect of
duty, or having been taken prisoner or so
captured fails to rejoin his service when able
to do so; or
(b) without due authority holds correspondence
with, or communicates intelligence to, the
enemy or any person in league with the
enemy or having come by the knowledge of
any such correspondence or communication,
wilfully omits to discover it immediately to
his Commandant or other superior officer,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

O f f e n c e s 16. Any person subject to this Act who commits any ofpunishable
more se- the following offences, that is to say,verely on active duty than (a) forces a safeguard, or forces or uses criminal
at other
times. force to a sentry; or

[PAGE 12]
BSF ACT 11

(b) breaks into any house or other place in search
of plunder; or

(c) being a sentry sleeps upon his post, or is
intoxicated; or

(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves
his guard, picket, patrol or post; or

(e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a
false alarm in camp or quarters, or spreads
or causes to be spread reports calculated to
create unnecessary alarm or despondency; or

(f) makes known the parole, watchword or
countersign to any person not entitled to
receive it; or knowingly gives a parole,
watch-word or countersign different from
what he received.

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court:-

(A) If he commits any such offence when on active
duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years or such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and

(B) If he commits any such offence when not on
active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for
a term which may extend to seven years or such
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

17. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say:-

Mutiny.
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any
other person to cause any mutiny in the Force
or in the military, naval or air forces of India
or any forces co-operating therewith; or

(b) joins in any such mutiny; or
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use
his utmost endeavour to suppress the same; or

[PAGE 13]
12 BSF ACT

(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the
existence of any such mutiny, or of any
intention to mutiny or of any such conspiracy,
does not, without delay, give information
thereof to his Commandant or other superior
officer; or

(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the Force
or in the military, naval or air forces of India
or any forces co-operating therewith from his
duty or allegiance to the Union;

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.

18. (1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts
or attempts to desert the service shall, on conviction by a
Security Force Court,-

Desertion
and aiding (a) if he commits the offence when on active duty
desertion. or when under orders for active duty, be liable
to suffer death or such less punishment as is
in this Act mentioned; and

(b) if he commits the offence under any other
circumstances, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend
to seven years or such less punishment as is
in this Act mentioned.

(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly
harbours any such deserter shall, on conviction by a Security
Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in
this Act mentioned.

(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being
cognizant of any desertion or attempt at desertion of a person
subject to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own
or some other superior officer, or take any steps in his power

[PAGE 14]
BSF ACT 13

to cause such person to be apprehended, shall, on conviction by
a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a
term which may extend to two years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned.

19. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say:-
(a) absents himself without leave; or
Absence
(b) without sufficient cause overstays leave without
granted to him; or leave.
(c) being on leave of absence and having
received information from the appropriate
authority that any battalion or part thereof or
any other unit of the Force, to which he
belongs, has been ordered on active duty,
fails, without sufficient cause, to rejoin
without delay; or
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the
time fixed at the parade or place appointed
for exercise or duty; or
(e) when on parade, or on the line of march,
without sufficient cause or without leave
from his superior officer, quits the parade or
line of march; or
(f) when in camp or elsewhere, is found beyond
any limits fixed, or in any place prohibited,
by any general, local or other order, without
a pass or written leave from his superior
officer; or
(g) without leave from his superior officer or
without due cause, absents himself from any
school when duly ordered to attend there,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
20. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, that is to say,-

(a) uses criminal force to or assaults his superior

[PAGE 15]
14 BSF ACT

Striking or officer; or
threatening
superior of- (b) uses threatening language to such officer; or
ficers. (c) uses insubordinate language to such officer;
shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court,-

(A) if such officer is at the time in the execution
of his office or, if the offence is committed on active duty, be
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend
to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned; and

(B) in other cases, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
Provided that in the case of an offence specified in
clause (c), the imprisonment shall not exceed five years.

21. (1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys
in such manner as to show a wilful defiance of authority any
lawful command given personally by his superior officer in
the execution of his office whether the same is given orally,
Disobedience
to superior or in writing or by signal or otherwise, shall on conviction
officer. by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys
any lawful command given by his superior officer shall, on
conviction by a Security Force Court,-

(a) if he commits such offence when on active
duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this
Act mentioned; and
(b) if he commits such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this
Act mentioned.
22. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, that is to say,-

[PAGE 16]
BSF ACT 15

(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affray or disorder, Insubordinarefuses to obey any officer, though of inferior tionobstruction.and
rank, who orders him into arrest, or uses criminal
force to or assaults any such officer; or
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person,
whether subject to this Act or not, in whose custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or is
not his superior officer; or
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to apprehend
him or to have him in charge; or
(d) breaks out of barracks, camp or quarters; or
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other
order; or
(f) impedes the Force Police referred to in section 63 or any person lawfully acting on his
behalf, or when called upon, refuses to assist
in the execution of his duty a Force Police or
any person lawfully acting on his behalf,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend, in the
case of the offences specified in clauses (d) and (e), to two
years, and in the case of the offences specified in the other
clauses, to ten years, or in either case such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned.

23. Any person having become subject to this Act who
is discovered to have made at the time of enrolment a wilfully
false answer to any question set forth in the prescribed form
of enrolment which has been put to him by the enrolling
officer before whom he appears for the purpose of being False anenrolled, shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be swers on en- rolment
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.
24. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, that is to say,-

(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel,

[PAGE 17]
16 BSF ACT

Certain forms indecent or unnatural kind; or
of disgraceful
conduct. (b) malingers, or feigns, or produces disease or
infirmity in himself or intentionally delays his
cure or aggravates his disease or infirmity;
or
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person
unfit for service, voluntarily causes hurt to himself
or that person,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

25. Any officer, subordinate officer or under-officer, who
uses criminal force to or otherwise ill-treats any person subject
to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or position, shall,
on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer
Ill-treating a imprisonment for a term, which may extend to seven years
subordinate.
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

26. Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state
of intoxication, whether on duty or not, shall, on conviction
by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months or such less
Intoxication. punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

27. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say,-

(a) when in command of a guard, picket, patrol
Permitting or post, releases without proper authority,
escape of
person in whether wilfully or without reasonable
custody. excuse, any person committed to his charge,
or refuses to receive any prisoner or person
so committed; or
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to
escape any person who is committed to his
charge, or whom it is his duty to keep or guard,

[PAGE 18]
BSF ACT 17

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable, if acted
wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to
ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and
if he has not acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years or such less punishment as is in
this Act mentioned.

28. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say,-

(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or
confinement without bringing him to trial,
or fails to bring his case before the proper Irregularity
authority for investigation; or inwithconnectionarrest or
(b) having committed a person to Force custody confinement.
fails without reasonable cause to deliver at
the time of such committal, or as soon as
practicable, and in any case within forty-eight
hours thereafter, to the officer or other person
into whose custody the person arrested is
committed, an account in writing signed by
himself of the offence with which the person
so committed is charged,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

29. Any person subject to this Act who, being in lawful
custody, escapes or attempts to escape, shall, on conviction
by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three years or such less
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
Escape from
30. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of custody.
the following offences, that is to say,-
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the
Government, or to any Force mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or
Offences in
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his respect of
property.

[PAGE 19]
18 BSF ACT

own use any such property; or

(c) commits criminal breach of trust in respect of
any such property; or

(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such
property in respect of which any of the
offences under clauses (a), (b) and (c) has
been committed, knowing or having reason
to believe the commission of such offence;
or

(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of
the Government entrusted to him; or

(f) does any other thing with intent of defraud,
or to cause wrongful gain to one person or
wrongful loss to another person,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

31. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say,-

(a) commits extortion; or
(b) without proper authority exacts from any
person money, provisions or service,
Extortion
and shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable tocorruption.
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

32. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say,-
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making
away with, any arms, ammunition,
equipment, instruments, tools, clothing or any
other thing being the property of theMaking
away with Government issued to him for his use or
equipment. entrusted to him; or

[PAGE 20]
BSF ACT 19

(b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause
(a); or

(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal
or decoration granted to him,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend, in the
case of the offences specified in clause (a), to ten years, and
in the case of the offences specified in the other clauses, to
five years or in either case such less punishment as is in this
Act mentioned.

33. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say,-

(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned
in clause (a) of section 32, or any property
belonging to any Force mess, band or
institution, or to any person subject to this
Injury to
Act; or property.
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or
destruction of, any property of the
Government by fire; or

(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill-treats or
loses any animal entrusted to him,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable, if
he has acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this
Act mentioned; and if he has acted without reasonable excuse,
to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
34. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the
following offences, that is to say,-

(a) makes a false accusation against any person
subject to this Act, knowing or having reason
to believe such accusation to be false; or

[PAGE 21]
20 BSF ACT

False accusa- (b) in making a complaint against any person subject
tions.
to this Act makes any statement affecting the
character of such person, knowing or having
reason to believe such statement to be false, or
knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material
facts,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

35. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say,-

(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or
other document made or signed by him, or
of the contents of which it is his duty to
ascertain the accuracy, knowingly makes, or
Falsifying official docu- is privy to the making of, any false or
ments and fraudulent statement; or
false declarations. (b) in any document of the description mentioned
in clause (a) knowingly makes, or is privy to
the making of, any omission, with intent to
defraud; or

(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any
person, or knowingly and with intent to
defraud, suppresses, defaces, alters or makes
away with any document which it is his duty
to preserve or produce; or

(d) where it is his official duty to make a
declaration respecting any matter, knowingly
makes a false declaration; or

(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person,
any pension, allowance or other advantage
or privilege by a statement which is false, and
which he either knows or believes to be false
or does not believe to be true, or by making

[PAGE 22]
BSF ACT 21

or using a false entry in any book or record, or
by making any document containing a false
statement, or by omitting to make a true entry
or document containing a true statement,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

36. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say,-

(a) when signing any document relating to pay,
arms, ammunition, equipment, clothing,
supplies or stores, or any property of the
Government fraudulently leaves in blank any Signing in blank and
material part for which his signature is a failure to revoucher; or port.

(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make
or send a report or return which it is his duty
to make or send,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

37. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say,-

(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as
a witness before a Security Force Court,
wilfully or without reasonable excuse, makes
default in attending; or Offenceslating to Se-re-
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation curity Force Court.
legally required by a Security Force Court to
be taken or made; or

(c) refuses to produce or deliver any document
in his power or control legally required by a
Security Force Court to be produced or
delivered by him; or

[PAGE 23]
22 BSF ACT

(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question
which he is by law bound to answer; or
(e) is guilty of contempt of the Security Force
Court by using insulting or threatening
language, or by causing any interruption or
disturbance in the proceedings of such court,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to
suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

38. Any person subject to this Act who, having been
duly sworn or affirmed before any Security Force Court or
other court competent under this Act to administer an oath
or affirmation, makes any statement which is false, and
False evi- which he either knows or believes to be false or does not
dence. believe to be true, shall, on conviction by a Security Force
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in
this Act mentioned.

39. Any officer, subordinate officer or an under-officer
who, having received the pay of a person subject to this Act
unlawfully detains or refuses to pay the same when due, shall,
on conviction by a Security Force Court be liable to suffer
U n l a w f u l imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or
detention of such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
pay.
40. Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any
act or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is
prejudicial to good order and discipline of the Force shall,
on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable to suffer
Violation of imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years
good order or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
and discipline.
41. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of
the following offences, that is to say,-
(a) being in command at any post or on the march,
and receiving a complaint that any one under his
M i s c e l l a - command has beaten or otherwise maltreated
neous of- or oppressed any person, or has disturbed any
fences.

[PAGE 24]
BSF ACT 23

fair or market, or committed any riot or trespass,
fails to have due reparation made to the injured
person or to report the case to the proper
authority; or
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise,
intentionally insults the religion, or wounds the
religious feelings of, any person; or
(c) attempts to commit suicide, and in such attempt
does any act towards the commission of such
offence; or
(d) being below the rank of subordinate officer, when
off duty, appears without proper authority, in or
about camp, or in or about, or when going to,
or returning from, any town or bazaar, carrying
a rifle, sword or other offensive weapon; or
(e) directly or indirectly accepts or obtains or agrees
to accept, or attempts to obtain, for himself or
for any other person, any gratification as a
motive or reward for procuring the enrolment
of any person, or leave of absence, promotion
or any other advantage or indulgence for any
person in the service; or
(f) commits any offence against the property or
person of any inhabitant of, or resident in,
the country in which he is serving,

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, be liable
to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.

42. Any person subject to this Act who attempts to
commit any of the offences specified in sections 14 to 41
(both inclusive) and in such attempt does any act towards the
commission of the offence;

shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court, where no
express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of Attempt.
such attempt, be liable,-

[PAGE 25]
24 BSF ACT

(a) if the offence attempted to be committed is
punishable with death, to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend
to fourteen years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned; and
(b) if the offence attempted to be committed is
punishable with imprisonment, to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend
to one-half of the longest term provided for
that offence or such less punishment as is in
the Act mentioned.

43. Any person subject to this Act who abets the
commission of any of the offences specified in sections 14
to 41 (both inclusive) shall, on conviction by a Security Force
Court, if the Act abetted is committed in consequence of the
abetment and no express provision is made by this Act for
the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the
Abetment of punishment provided for that offence or such less punishment
offences that as is in this Act mentioned.
have been
committed.
44. Any person subject to this Act who abets the
commission of any of the offences punishable with death
under sections 14, 17 and sub-section (1) of section 18 shall,
on conviction by a Security Force Court, if that offence be
not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no
express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of
Abetment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
o f f e n c e s which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment
punishable
with death as is in this Act mentioned.
and not committed. 45. Any person subject to this Act who abets the
commission of any of the offences specified in sections
14 to 41 (both inclusive) and punishable with
imprisonment shall, on conviction by a Security Force Court,
if that offence be not committed in consequence of the
abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for theAbetment of
offences pun- punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment
ishable with for a term which may extend to one-half of the longest term i m p r i s o n ment and not provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this
committed.

[PAGE 26]
BSF ACT 25

Act mentioned.

46. Subject to the provisions of section 47, any person
subject to this Act who at any place in, or beyond India,
commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an
offence against this Act and, if charged therewith under this
section shall be liable to be tried by a Security Force Court
and, on conviction, be punishable as follows, that is to say,-

Civil of-
(a) if the offence is one which would be fences.
punishable under any law in force in India
with death, he shall be liable to suffer any
punishment, assigned for the offence, by the
aforesaid law and such less punishment as is
in this Act mentioned; and
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer
any punishment, assigned for the offence by
the law in force in India, or imprisonment
for a term which may extend to seven years,
or such less punishment as is in this Act
mentioned.

47. A person subject to this Act who commits an offence
of murder or of culpable homicide not amounting to murder
against, or of rape in relation to, a person not subject to this
Act shall not be deemed to be guilty of an offence against
this Act and shall not be tried by a Security Force Court,
unless he commits any of the said offences,-
Civil of-
(a) while on active duty; or fences not triable by a Se-
(b) at any place outside India; or curity Force
(c) at any place specified by the Central Govern- Court.
ment by notification in this behalf.

[PAGE 27]
26 BSF ACT

CHAPTER-IV

PUNISHMENT

Punishments 48.(1) Punishments may be inflicted in respect of offences
awardable by
S e c u r i t y committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted by
Force Courts. Security Force Courts according to the scale following, that
is to say:-

(a) death;
(b) Imprisonment which may be for the term of
life or any other lesser term but excluding
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
months in Force custody,
(c) dismissal from the service;
(d) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
months in Force custody;
(e) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or
grade or place in this list of their rank in the
case of an under-officer;
(f) forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture
of all or any part of the service for the purpose of promotion;
(g) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other prescribed
purpose;
(h) fine, in respect of civil offences;
(i) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the
case of persons below the rank of an underofficer;
(j) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period
not exceeding three months for an offence
committed on active duty;
(k) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to
dismissal from the service of all arrears of
pay and allowances and other public money
due to him at the time of such dismissal;

[PAGE 28]
BSF ACT 27

(l) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss
or damage occasioned by the offence for which he is
convicted is made good.

(2) Each of the punishments specified in sub-section (1)
shall be deemed to be inferior in degree to every punishment
preceding it in the above scale.

49. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Security Force Alternative
Court may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any punishments awardable by
of the offences specified in sections 14 to 45 (both inclusive) S e c u r i t y
award either the particular punishment with which the Force Courts.
offence is stated in the said sections to be punishable or, in
lieu thereof, any one of the punishments lower in the scale
set out in section 48 regard being had to the nature and degree
of the offence.

50. A sentence of a Security Force Court may award in Combination
addition to, or without any one other punishment, the of punish- ments.
punishment specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 48, and any one or more of the punishments specified
in clauses (e) to (l) (both inclusive) of that sub-section.

51. When on active duty any enrolled person has been Retention in
the Force of a
sentenced by a Security Force Court to dismissal or to person conimprisonment whether combined with dismissal or not, the victed on active duty.
prescribed officer may direct that such person may be
retained to serve in the ranks, and such service shall be
reckoned as part of his term of imprisonment if any.

52. Punishment may also be inflicted in respect of Punishments
offences committed by persons subject to this Act without othant h e rbyw iSe-s e
the intervention of a Security Force Court in the manner curity Force
stated in sections 53 and 55. Courts.

53. Subject to the provisions of section 54, a Minor pun-
Commandant or such other officer as is, with the consent of ishments.
Central Government, specified by the Director-General may,

[PAGE 29]
28 BSF ACT

in the prescribed manner, proceed against a person subject
to this Act, otherwise than as an officer or a subordinate
officer, who is charged with an offence under this Act and
award such person, to the extent prescribed, one or more of
the following punishments, that is to say:-

(a) imprisonment in Force custody upto twentyeight days;
(b) detention up to twenty-eight days;
(c) confinement to the lines upto twenty-eight days;
(d) extra guards or duties;
(e) deprivation of any special position or special
emoluments or any acting rank or reduction
to a lower grade of pay;
(f) forfeiture of good service and good conduct
pay;
(g) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(h) fine upto fourteen day’s pay in any one month;
(i) deductions from his pay of any sum required
to make good such compensation for any
expense, loss, damage or destruction caused
by him to the Central Government or to any
building or property as may be awarded by
his Commandant.

Limit of pun- 54. (1) In the case of an award of two or more of the
ishments under section punishments specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section
53. 53, the punishments specified in clause (c) or clause (d) shall
take effect only at the end of the punishment specified in
clause (a) or clause (b).

(2) When two or more of the punishments
specified in the said clauses (a), (b) and (c) are awarded to a
person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more
of the said punishments, the whole extent of the punishments
shall not exceed in the aggregate forty two days.

[PAGE 30]
BSF ACT 29

(3) The punishments specified in the said clauses
(a), (b) and (c) shall not be awarded to any person who is of
the rank of an under officer or was, at the time of committing
the offence for which he is punished, of such rank.
(4) The punishment specified in clause (g) of
section 53 shall not be awarded to any person below the rank
of an under-officer.

55. (1) An officer not below the rank of the Deputy Punishment
Inspector-General or such other officer as is, with the consent of persons of and below
of the Central government, specified by the Director-General the rank of
may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a person of subordinate officers by
or below the rank of a subordinate officer who is charged Deputy Inwith an offence under this Act and award one or more of the spectors Gen- eral and othfollowing punishments, that is to say:- ers.

(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of
them whose promotion depends upon the
length of service forfeiture of service for the
purpose of promotion for a period not
exceeding twelve months, but subject to the
right of the accused person to the award to
elect to be tried by a Security Force Court;
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(c) stoppage of pay and allowances until any
proved loss or damage occasioned by the
offence of which he is convicted is made
good.

(2) In every case in which punishment has been
awarded under sub-section (1), certified true copies of the
proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner,
by the officer awarding the punishment to the prescribed
superior authority who may, if the punishment awarded
appears to him to be illegal, unjust or excessive, cancel, vary,
or remit the punishment and make such other direction as
may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case.

56. (1) Whenever any weapon or part of a weapon, Collective
or ammunition, forming part of the equipment of a unit of fines.

[PAGE 31]
30 BSF ACT

the Force, is lost or stolen, an officer not below the rank of
the Commandant of a battalion may, after making such
enquiry as he thinks fit and subject to the rules, impose a
collective fine upon the subordinate officers, under-officers
and men of such unit, or upon so many of them as, in his
judgment, should be held responsible for such loss or theft.

(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage
on the pay of the individuals on whom it falls.

[PAGE 32]
BSF ACT 31

CHAPTER-V

ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE
TRIAL

57. (1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged Custody of
with an offence may be taken into Force custody, under the offenders.
order of any superior officer.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (1), an officer may order into Force custody any other
officer, though such other officer may be of a higher rank,
engaged in a quarrel, affray or disorder.

58. (1) It shall be the duty of every Commandant to Duty of
take care that a person under his command when charged Cdanto m inm a re-n with an offence is not detained in custody for more than forty- gard to detention.
eight hours after the committal of such person into custody
is reported to him, without the charge being investigated,
unless investigation within that period seems to him to be
impracticable having regard to the public service.

(2) The case of every person being detained in
custody beyond a period of forty-eight hours, and the reasons
therefor, shall be reported by the Commandant to the Deputy
Inspector General under whom he is serving or such other
officer to whom an application may be made to convene a
Security Force Court for the trial of the person charged.

(3) In reckoning the period of forty-eight hours
specified in sub section (1), Sundays and other public holidays
shall be excluded.

(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the
Central Government may make rules providing for the
manner in which and the period for which any person subject
to this Act may be taken into and detained in Force custody,
pending the trial by any competent authority for any offence
committed by him.

[PAGE 33]
32 BSF ACT

Interval be- 59. In every case where any such person as is mentioned
tween committal and in section 57 and as is not on active duty, remains in such
trial. custody for a longer period than eight days without a Security
Force Court for his trial being convened, a special report
giving reasons for the delay shall be made by his
Commandant in the manner prescribed, and a similar report
shall be forwarded at intervals of every eight days until a
Security Force Court is convened or such person is released
from custody.

Arrest by 60. Whenever any person subject to this Act, who is
civil authori- accused of an offence under this Act, is within the jurisdictionties.
of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or police
officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to Force
custody of such person upon receipt of a written application
to that effect signed by his Commandant or an officer
authorised by the Commandant in that behalf.

Capture of 61. (1) Whenever any person subject to this Act
deserters.
deserts, the Commandant of the unit to which he belongs,
shall give information of the desertion to such civil authorities
as, in his opinion, may be able to afford assistance towards
the capture of the deserter; and such authorities shall
thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter
in like manner as if he were a person for whose apprehension
a warrant had been issued by a magistrate, and shall deliver
the deserter, when apprehended, into Force custody.

(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant
any person reasonably believed to be subject to this Act, and
to be a deserter or to be travelling without authority, and
shall bring him without delay before the nearest magistrate,
to be dealt with according to law.

Inquiry into 62. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been
a b s e n c e
w i t h o u t absent from duty without due authority for a period of thirty
leave. days, a court of inquiry shall, as soon as practicable, be
appointed by such authority and in such manner as may be
prescribed, and such court shall, on oath or affirmation
administered in the prescribed manner, inquire respecting

[PAGE 34]
BSF ACT 33

the absence of the person, and the deficiency, if any, in the
property of the Government entrusted to his care or in any
arms, ammunition, equipment, instruments, clothing or
necessaries, and if satisfied of the fact of such absence
without due authority or other sufficient cause, the court
shall declare such absence and the period thereof and the
said deficiency, if any, and the Commandant of the unit to
which the person belongs shall make a record thereof in
the prescribed manner.

(2) If the person declared absent does not
afterwards surrender or is not apprehended, he shall for the
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a deserter.

63. (1) The Director-General or any prescribed Force police
officer may appoint persons (in this Act referred to as Force officers.
police) for discharging the functions specified in sub-section
(2) and (3).

(2) The duties of a person appointed under subsection (1), are to take charge of persons confined for any
offence, to preserve good order and discipline and to prevent
breaches of the same by persons serving in, or attached to,
the Force.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
section 57, a person appointed under sub-section (1) may, at
any time, arrest and detain for trial any person subject to this
Act who commits, or is charged with, an offence, and may
also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in
pursuance of a sentence awarded by a Security Force Court
or by an officer exercising authority under section 53 but
shall not inflict any punishment on his own authority:

Provided that no officer shall be so arrested or
detained otherwise than on the order of another officer.

[PAGE 35]
34 BSF ACT

CHAPTER-VI

SECURITY FORCE COURTS

Kinds of Se- 64. For the purposes of this Act there shall be three kinds
curity Force
Courts. of Security Force Courts, that is to say:-

(a) General Security Force Courts;
(b) Petty Security Force Courts; and
(c) Summary Security Force Courts.

Power to 65. A General Security Force Court may be convened
convene a
General Se- by the Central Government or the Director-General or by
curity Force any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the
Court.
Director-General.

Power to 66. A Petty Security Force Court may be convened by
convene a
petty Secu- an officer having power to convene a General Security Force
rity Force Court or by an officer empowered in this behalf by warrant
Court.
of any such officer.

Contents of 67. A warrant, issued under section 65 or section 66 may
warrants issued under contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the
sections 65 officer issuing it may think fit.
and 66.
Composition 68. A General Security Force Court shall consist of notof General
S e c u r i t y less than five officers, each of whom has held the post of
Force Court. Deputy Superintendent of Police for not less than three whole
years and of whom not less than four are of a rank not below
that of a confirmed Deputy Superintendent of Police.

Explanation:-For the purposes of this section and section
69 “Deputy Superintendent of Police” includes any post of a
higher rank and any post declared by Central Government
by notification to be an equivalent post as also any post higher
in rank than the post so declared.

Composition 69. A Petty Security Force Court shall consist of not less
of a petty Security Froce than three officers each of whom has held the post of Deputy
Court. Superintendent of Police for not less than two whole years.

[PAGE 36]
BSF ACT 35

70. (1) A Summary Security Force Court may be held Summary
Security
by the Commandant of any unit of the Force and he alone Force Court.
shall constitute the Court.

(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout
by two other persons who shall be officers or subordinate
officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn
or affirmed.

71. (1) If a Security Force Court after the Dissolution
commencement of a trial is reduced below the minimum ofForcea SecurityCourt.
number of officers required by this Act, it shall be dissolved.

(2) If, on account of the illness of the Law Officer
or of the accused before the finding, it is impossible to
continue the trial, a Security Force Court shall be dissolved.

(3) The officer who convened a Security Force
Court may dissolve the same if it appears to him that the
exigencies of the service or necessities of discipline render
it impossible or inexpedient to continue the said Security
Force Court.

(4) Where a Security Force Court is dissolved
under this section, the accused may be tried again.

72. A General Security Force Court shall have the power Powers of a
to try any person subject to this Act for any offence punishable General Se- curity Force
thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised thereby. Court.

73. A Petty Security Force Court shall have power to try Powers of a
any person subject to this Act other than an officer or a Pettyrity ForceSecusubordinate officer for any offence made punishable Court.
thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised by this Act
other than a sentence of death, or imprisonment for a term
exceeding two years.

74. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), Powers of a
a Summary Security Force Court may try any offence Summary Se- curity Force
punishable under this Act. Court.

[PAGE 37]
36 BSF ACT

(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate
action and reference can without detriment to discipline be
made to the officer empowered to convene a Petty Security
Force Court for the trial of the alleged offender, an officer
holding a Summary Security Force Court shall not try without
such reference any offence punishable under any of the
sections 14, 17 and 46 of this Act, or any offence against the
officer holding the court.

(3) A Summary Security Force Court may try any
person subject to this Act and under the command of the
officer holding the court, except an officer, or a subordinate
officer.

(4) A Summary Security Force Court may pass
any sentence which may be passed under this Act, except
the sentence of death or of imprisonment for a term exceeding
the limit specified in sub-section (5).

(5) The limit referred to in sub-section (4) shall be,-

(a) one year, if the officer holding the Security
Force Court has held either the post of
1Superintendent of Police or a post declared
by the Central Government by notification
to be equivalent thereto, for a period of not
less than three years or holds a post of higher
rank than either of the said posts; and

(b) three months, in any other case.

Prohibition 75. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been
of second
trial. acquitted or convicted of an offence by a Security Force Court
or by a criminal court or has been dealt with under section
53 or under section 55, he shall not be liable to be tried again
for the same offence by a Security Force Court or dealt with
under the said sections.

1. Vide SO-592 dated 25-2-1997, post of Dy Comdt has been declared
equivalent to the post of Superintendent of Police.

[PAGE 38]
BSF ACT 37

(2) When any person, subject to this Act, has been
acquitted or convicted of an offence by a Security Force Court
or has been dealt with under section 53 or section 55, he
shall not be liable to be tried again by a criminal court for
the same offence or on the same facts.

76. No trial for an offence of desertion, other than Period of
desertion on active duty, shall be commenced if the person limitation for trial for an
in question, not being an officer, has subsequently to the offence of decommission of the offence, served continuously in an sertion in cer- tain cases.
exemplary manner for not less than three years with any unit
of the Force.

77. (1) Where an offence under this Act had been Trial, etc. of
committed by any person while subject to this Act, and he offender who ceases to be
has ceased to be so subject, he may be taken into and kept in subject to
Force custody and tried and punished for such offence as if this Act.
he continued to be so subject.

(2) No such person shall be tried for an offence,
unless his trial commences within six months after he had
ceased to be subject to this Act:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall apply to the trial of any such person for an offence of
desertion or for any of the offences mentioned in section
17 or shall affect the jurisdiction of a criminal court to try
any offence triable by such court as well as by a Security
Force Court.

78. (1) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced Application
by a Security Force Court to imprisonment, this Act shall oftermActofduringsenapply to him during the term of his sentence, though he is tence.
dismissed from the Force, or has otherwise ceased to be
subject to this act, and he may be kept, removed, imprisoned
and punished as if he continued to be subject to this Act.

(2) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced
by a Security Force Court to death, this Act shall apply to
him till the sentence is carried out.

[PAGE 39]
38 BSF ACT

Place of trial. 79. Any person subject to this Act who commits any
offence against it may be tried and punished for such offence
in any place whatever.

Choice be- 80. When a criminal court and a Security Force Court
tween criminal court and have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in
S e c u r i t y the discretion of the Director-General, or the Inspector-
Force Court. General or the Deputy Inspector-General within whose
command the accused person is serving or such other officer
as may be prescribed, to decide before which court the
proceedings shall be instituted, and, if that officer decides
that they shall be instituted before a Security Force Court, to
direct that the accused person shall be detained in Force
custody.

Power of 81. (1) When a criminal court having jurisdiction is
C r i m i n a l of opinion that proceedings shall be instituted before itselfcourt to require deliv- in respect of any alleged offence, it may, by written notice,
ery of of- require the officer referred to in section 80 at his option,fender.
either to deliver over the offender to the nearest magistrate
to be proceeded against according to law, or to postpone
proceedings, pending a reference to the Central Government.

(2) In every such case the said officer shall either
deliver over the offender in compliance with the requisition,
or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before
which the proceedings are to be instituted, for the determination of the Central Government whose order upon such
reference shall be final.

[PAGE 40]
BSF ACT 39

CHAPTER-VII

PROCEDURE OF SECURITY FORCE
COURTS

82. At every General Security Force Court or Petty Presiding Of-
Security Force Court, the senior member shall be the ficer.
presiding officer.

83. Every General Security Force Court shall, and every Law Officers.
Petty Security Force Court may, be attended by a Law Officer,
or if no such officer is available an officer approved by the
Chief Law Officer, or a Law Officer.

84. (1) At all trials by a General Security Force Court Challenges.
or by a Petty Security Force Court, as soon as the court is
assembled, the names of the presiding officer and members
shall be read over to the accused, who shall thereupon be
asked whether he objects to being tried by any officer sitting
on the court.

(2) If the accused objects to such officer, his
objection and also the reply thereto of the officer objected to
shall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of
the court shall, in the absence of the challenged officer decide
on the objection.

(3) If the objection is allowed by one-half or more
of the votes of the officers entitled to vote, the objection
shall be allowed, and the member objected to shall retire,
and his vacancy may be filled in the prescribed manner, by
another officer subject to the same right of the accused to
object.

(4) When no challenge is made, or when a
challenge has been made and disallowed, or the place of every
officer successfully challenged has been filled by another
officer to whom no objection is made or allowed, the court
shall proceed with the trial.

[PAGE 41]
40 BSF ACT

Oaths of 85. (1) An oath or affirmation in the prescribed
member, Law
Officer and manner shall be administered to every member of every
witness. Security Force Court and to the Law Officer or as the case
may be the officer approved under section 83, before the
commencement of the trial.

(2) Every person giving evidence before a
Security Force Court shall be examined after being duly
sworn or affirmed in the prescribed form.

(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall not
apply where the witness is a child under twelve years of age
and the Security Force Court is of opinion that though the
witness understands the duty of speaking the truth, he does
not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation.

Voting by 86. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2)
members. and (3), every decision of a Security Force Court shall be
passed by an absolute majority of votes; and where there is
an equality of votes on either the finding or the sentence, the
decision shall be in favour of the accused.

(2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a
General Security Force Court without the concurrence of at
least two-thirds of the members of the court.

(3) In matters, other than a challenge or the
finding or sentence, the presiding officer shall have a casting
vote.

General rule 87. The Indian Evidence Act 1872 shall, subject to the 1 of 1872
as to evidence. provisions of this Act, apply to all proceedings before a
Security Force Court.

Judicial no- 88. A Security Force Court may take judicial notice oftice.
any matter within the general knowledge of the members as
officers of the Force.

[PAGE 42]
BSF ACT 41

89. (1) The convening officer, the presiding officer Summoning
of a Security Force Court, the Law Officer or, as the case witnesses.
may be, the officer approved under section 83 or the
Commandant of the accused person may, by summons under
his hand, require the attendance, at a time and place to be
mentioned in the summons, of any person either to give
evidence or to produce any document or other thing.

(2) In the case of a witness who is subject to this
Act, the summons shall be sent to his Commandant and such
officer shall serve it upon him accordingly.

(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons
shall be sent to the magistrate within whose jurisdiction he
may be, or resides, and such magistrate shall give effect to
the summons as if the witness were required in the court of
such a magistrate.

(4) When a witness is required to produce any
particular document or other thing in his possession or power,
the summons shall describe it with reasonable precision.

90. (1) Nothing in section 89 shall be deemed to Documents
affect the operation of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian e x e m p t e d from produc-
1 of 1872 Evidence Act, 1872 or to apply to any letter, postcard, tion.
telegram or other document in the custody of the postal or
telegraph authorities.

(2) If any document in such custody is, in the
opinion of any District Magistrate, Chief Presidency
Magistrate, High Court or Court of Sessions, wanted for the
purpose of any Security Force Court, such magistrate, or
Court, may require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the
case may be, to deliver such document to such person as
such magistrate, or Court may direct.

(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of
any other magistrate or of any Commissioner of Police or
District Superintendent of Police, wanted for any such
purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph authorities,

[PAGE 43]
42 BSF ACT

as the case may be, to cause such search to be made for, and
to detain such document pending the orders of any such
District Magistrate, Chief Presidency Magistrate or High
Court or Court of Sessions.

Commissions 91. (1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Security
for examination of wit- Force Court, it appears to the court that the examination of a
nesses. witness is necessary for the ends of justice, and that the
attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an
amount of delay, expense or inconvenience which, in the
circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, such court
may address the Chief Law Officer in order that a commission
to take the evidence of such witness may be issued.

(2) The Chief Law Officer may then, if he thinks
necessary, issue a commission to any district magistrate or
magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction such witness resides, to take the evidence of such
witness.

(3) The magistrate or officer to whom the
commission is issued, or, he is the District Magistrate, he or
such Magistrate of the first class as he appoints in this behalf,
shall proceed to the place where the witness is, or shall
summon the witness before him and shall take down his
evidence in the same manner, and may for this purpose
exercise the same powers, as in the trials of warrant-cases 5 of 1898
under the code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or
in any place outside India, the commission may be issued in
the manner specified in Chapter XI of the Code of Criminal 5 of 1898.
Procedure, 1898.

Examination 92. (1) The prosecutor and the accused person in any
of witness on
commission. case in which a commission is issued under section 91 may
respectively forward any interro-gatories in writing which
the court may think relevant to the issue, and the Magistrate
or officer executing the commission shall examine the
witness upon such interrogatories.

[PAGE 44]
BSF ACT 43

(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may
appear before such Magistrate or officer by counsel, or except
in the case of an accused person in custody, in person, and
may examine, cross-examine and re-examine, as the case
may be, the said witness.

(3) After a commission issued under section 91
has been duly executed, it shall be returned, together with
the deposition of the witness examined thereunder to the
Chief Law Officer.

(4) On receipt of a Commission, and deposition
returned under sub-section (3), the Chief Law Officer shall
forward the same to the court at whose instance the
commission was issued or, if such court has been dissolved,
to any other court convened for the trial of the accused person,
and the commission, the return thereto and the deposition
shall be open to inspection by the prosecutor and the accused
person, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in
evidence in the case by either the prosecutor or the accused,
and shall form part of the proceedings of the court.

(5) In every case in which a commission is issued
under section 91, the trial may be adjourned for specified
time reasonably sufficient for the executions and return of
the commission.

93. (1) A person charged before a Security Force Conviction
Court with desertion may be found guilty of attempting to ofcharged.offence not
desert or of being absent without leave.

(2) A person charged before a Security Force
Court with attempting to desert may be found guilty of being
absent without leave.

(3) A person charged before a Security Force
Court with using criminal force may be found guilty of
assault.

(4) A person charged before a Security Force
Court with using threatening language may be found guilty
of using insubordinate language.

[PAGE 45]
44 BSF ACT

(5) A person charged before a Security Force
Court with any one of the offences specified in clauses (a),
(b), (c) and (d) of section 30 may be found guilty of any
other of these offences with which he might have been
charged.

(6) A person charged before a Security Force
Court with an offence punishable under section 46 may be
found guilty of any other offence of which he might have
been found guilty, if the provisions of the Code of Criminal 5 of 1898
Procedure, 1898, were applicable.

(7) A person charged before a Security Force
Court with any offence under this Act may, on failure of proof
of an offence having been committed in circumstances
involving a more severe punishment, be found guilty of the
same offence as having been committed in circumstances
involving a less severe punishment.

(8) A person charged before a Security Force
Court with any offence under this Act may be found guilty
of having attempted or abetted the commission of that
offence, although the attempt or abetment is not separately
charged.

Presumption 94. In any proceeding under this Act, any application,
as to signa- certificate, warrant, reply or other document purportingtures.
to be signed by an officer in the service of the
Government shall, on production, be presumed to have
been duly signed by the person by whom and in the
character in which it purports to have been signed, until
the contrary is shown.

Enrolment 95. (1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed
paper.
by an enrolling officer shall, in proceedings under this Act,
be evidence of the person enrolled having given the answers
to questions which he is therein represented as having given.

(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved
by the production of the original or a copy of his enrolment

[PAGE 46]
BSF ACT 45

paper purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer
having the custody of the enrolment paper.

96. (1) A letter, return or other document respecting Presumption
the service of any person in, or the dismissal or discharge of as to certain documents.
any person from, any unit of the Force, or respecting the
circumstances of any person not having served in, or belonged
to, any unit of the Force, if purporting to be signed by or on
behalf of the Central Government or the Director General,
or by any prescribed officer, shall be evidence of the facts
stated in such letter, return or other document.

(2) A Border Security Force list or Gazette
purporting to be published by authority shall be evidence of
the status and rank of the officers, subordinate officers therein
mentioned, and of any appointment held by them and of the
battalion, unit or branch of the Force to which they belong.

(3) Where a record is made in any battalion book
in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder or
otherwise in the discharge of official duties, and purports to
be signed by the Commandant or by the officer whose duty
it is to make such record, such record shall be evidence of
the facts therein stated.

(4) A copy of any record in any battalion book
purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer
having custody of such book shall be evidence of such
record.

(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being
tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without leave,
and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of
any officer or other person subject to this Act, or any unit of
the Force, or has been apprehended by such officer or person,
a certificate purporting to be signed by such officer or by the
Commandant of the unit to which such person belongs, as
the case may be, and stating the fact, date and place of such
surrender or apprehension, and the manner in which he was
dressed, shall be evidence of the matters so stated.

[PAGE 47]
46 BSF ACT

(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being
tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without leave
and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of,
or has been apprehended by, a police officer not below the
rank of an officer in charge of a police station, a certificate
purporting to be signed by such police officer and stating the
fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension and
the manner in which he was dressed shall be evidence of the
matters so stated.

(7) Any document purporting to be a report
under the hand of any Chemical Examiner or Assistant
Chemical Examiner to Government upon any matter or
thing duly submitted to him for examination or analysis
and report, may be used as evidence in any proceeding under
this Act.

Reference by 97. (1) If at any trial for desertion or absence without
accused to leave, over-staying leave or not rejoining when warned forGovernment
Officer. service, the accused person states in his defence any sufficient
or reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers
in support thereof to any officer in the service of the
Government, or if it appears that any such officer is likely to
prove or disprove the said statement in the defence, the court
shall address such officer and adjourn the proceedings until
his reply is received.

(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to
shall, if signed by him, be received in evidence and have the
same effect if made on oath before the court.

(3) If the court is dissolved before the receipt of
such reply or if the court omits to comply with the provisions
of this section, the convening officer may, at his discretion,
annul the proceedings and order a fresh trial.

Evidence of 98. (1) When any person subject to this Act has been
previous convictions and convicted by a Security Force Court of any offence, such
general char- Security Force Court may inquire into, and receive, and record
acter

[PAGE 48]
BSF ACT 47

evidence of any previous convictions of such person, either
by a Security Force Court or by a criminal court, or any
previous award of punishment under section 53 or 55, and
may further inquire into and record the general character of
such person and such other matters as may be prescribed.

(2) Evidence received under this section may be
either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or certified extracts
from, books of Security Force Courts or other official records;
and it shall not be necessary to give notice before trial to the
person tried that evidence as to his previous convictions or
character will be received.

(3) At a Summary Security Force Court, the
officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit, record any
previous convictions against the offender, his general
character, and such other matters as may be prescribed, as of
his own knowledge, instead of requiring them to be proved
under the foregoing provisions of this section.

99. (1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Security Lunacy of ac-
Force Court, it appears to the court that the person charged cused.
is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making
his defence, or that he committed the act alleged but was by
reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of knowing the
nature of the act or knowing that it was wrong or contrary to
law, the court shall record a finding accordingly.

(2) The presiding officer of the court, or, in the
case of a Summary Security Force Court, the officer holding
the trial, shall forthwith report the case to the confirming
officer, or to the authority empowered to deal with its finding
under section 115, as the case may be.

(3) The confirming officer to whom the case is
reported under sub-section (2) may, if he does not confirm
the finding, take steps to have the accused person tried by
the same or another Security Force Court for the offence
with which he was charged.

[PAGE 49]
48 BSF ACT

(4) The authority to whom the finding of a
Summary Security Force Court is reported under sub-section
(2), and a confirming officer confirming the finding in any
case so reported to him shall order the accused person to be
kept in custody in the prescribed manner and shall report the
case for the orders of the Central Government.

(5) On receipt of a report under-section (4), the
Central Government may order the accused person to be detained
in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.

Subsequent 100. Where any accused person, having been found by
fitness of lunatic accused reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making
for trial. his defence, is in custody or under detention under section
99, any officer prescribed in this behalf, may-

(a) if such person is in custody under sub-section (4) of section 99, on the report of a medical officer that he is capable of making his
defence, or

(b) if such person is detained in a jail under
sub-section (5) of section 99, on a certificate of the Inspector General of Prisons,
and if such person is detained in a lunatic
asylum under the said sub-section, on a
certificate of any two or more of the visitors of such asylum and if he is detained in
any other place under that sub-section, on
a certificate of the prescribed authority, that
he is capable of making his defence, take
steps to have such person tried by the same
or another Security Force Court for the offence with which he was originally charged
or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a
criminal court.

Transmission 101. A copy of every order made by an officer under
to Central
Government section 100 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be
of orders un- sent to the Central Government.
der section
100.

[PAGE 50]
BSF ACT 49

102. Where any person is in custody under sub-section Release of lu-
(4) of section 99 or under detention under sub-section (5) of naticcused. acthat section:-

(a) if such person is in custody under the said
sub-section (4), on the report of a medical
officer, or
(b) if such person is detained under the said subsection (5), on a certificate from any of the
authorities mentioned in clause (b) of section
100 that in the judgement of such officer or
authority such person may be released
without danger of his doing injury to himself
or to any other person.

the Central Government may order that such person be released
or detained in custody, or transferred to a public lunatic asylum
if he has not already been sent to such an asylum.

103. Where any relative or friend of any person who is Delivery of
in custody under sub-section (4) of section 99 or under lunatic ac- cused to reladetention under sub-section (5) of that section desires that tives.
he should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central
Government may, upon application by such relative or
friend and, on his giving security to the satisfaction of that
Government that the person delivered shall be properly
taken care of, and prevented from doing injury to himself
or to any other person, and be produced for the inspection
of such officer, and at such times and places, as the Central
Government may direct, order such person to be delivered
to such relative or friend.

104. When any property regarding which any offence Order for
appears to have been committed, or which appears to have custodydisposal andof
been used for the commission of any offence, is produced p r o p e r t y
before a Security Force Court during a trial, the court may pending trial.
make such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of
such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and if the
property is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after
recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, order it to be
sold or otherwise disposed of.

[PAGE 51]
50 BSF ACT

Order for dis- 105. (1) After the conclusion of a trial before any
posal of
property re- Security Force Court, the court or the officer confirming the
g a r d i n g finding or sentence of such Security Force Court, or anywhich offence is com- authority superior to such officer, or, in the case of a Summary
mitted. Security Force Court whose finding or sentence does not
require confirmation, an officer not below the rank of Deputy-
Inspector-General within whose command the trial was held,
may make such order as it or he thinks fit for the disposal by
destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to
be entitled to possession thereof, or otherwise, of any property
or document produced before the court or in its custody, or
regarding which any offence appears to have been committed
or which has been used for the commission of any offence.

(2) Where any order has been made under subsection (1) in respect of property regarding which an offence
appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed
and certified by the authority making the same may, whether
the trial was held within India or not, be sent to a magistrate
within whose jurisdiction such property for the time being is
situated, and such magistrate shall there-upon cause the order
to be carried into effect as if it were an order passed by him 5 of 1898.
under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898.

(3) In this section, the term “property” includes,
in the case of property regarding which an offence appears
to have been committed not only such property as has been
originally in the possession or under the control of any person,
but also any property into or for which the same may have
been converted or exchanged, and anything acquired by such
conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.

Powers of Se- 106. Any trial by a Security Force Court under the
curity Force provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be a judicialCourt in relation to pro- proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and 228 of the 45 of 1860.
ceedings un- Indian Penal Code and the Security Force Court shall beder this Act.
deemed to be a court within the meaning of sections 480 and 5 of 1898.
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,1898.

[PAGE 52]
BSF ACT 51

CHAPTER-VIII

CONFIRMATION AND REVISION

107. No finding or sentence of a General Security Force Finding and
Courts or a Petty Security Force Court shall be valid except sentence not valid, unless
so far as it may be confirmed as provided by this Act. confirmed.

108. The findings and sentences of General Security Force Power to
Courts may be confirmed by the Central Government or by c o n f i r m finding and,
any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the sentence of
Central Government. General Se- curity Force
Court.
109. The findings and sentences of Petty Security Force Power to
Courts may be confirmed by an officer having power to confirm find- ing and senconvene a General Security Force Court or by any officer tence of Petty
empowered in this behalf by warrant of such officer. Security Force Court.

110. A warrant issued under section 108 or section 109 Limitation of
powers of
may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as confirming
the authority issuing it may think fit. authority.

111. Subject to such restrictions, reservations or Power of
conditions, as may be contained in any warrant issued under confirming
authority to
section 108 or section 109, a confirming authority may, when mitigate, reconfirming the sentence of a Security Force Court, mitigate mit or commute senor remit the punishment thereby awarded, or commute that tences.
punishment for any punishment or punishments lower in the
scale laid down in section 48.

112. When any person subject to this Act is tried and Confirming
sentenced by a Security Force Court while on board a ship, of findings and senthe finding and sentence so far as not confirmed and executed tences on
on board the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like board a ship.
manner as if such person had been tried at the port of
disembarkation.

113. (1) Any finding or sentence of a Security Force Revision of
Court which requires confirmation may be once revised by finding or
sentence.
order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the

[PAGE 53]
52 BSF ACT

court, if so directed by the confirming authority, may take
additional evidence.

(2) The court, on revision, shall consist of the
same officers as were present when the original decision was
passed, unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.

(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause
thereof shall be duly certified in the proceedings, and the
court shall proceed with the revision, provided that, if a
General Security Force Court, it still consists of five officers,
or, if a Petty Security Force Court, of three officers.

Finding and 114. (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2),
sentence of a
Summary Se- the finding and sentence of a Summary Security Force Court
curity Force shall not require to be confirmed, but may be carried out
Court.
forthwith.

(2) If the officer holding the trial is of the rank of
Superintendent of Police or of a rank declared under clause
(a) of sub-section (5) of section 74 as equivalent thereto or
of a lower rank and has held such rank for less than five
years, he shall not, except on active duty, carry into effect
any sentence, until it has received the approval of an officer
not below the rank of Deputy Inspector General.

Transmission 115. The proceedings of every Summary Security Force
of proceedings of Sum- Court shall, without delay, be forwarded to the officer not
mary Secu- below the rank of Deputy Inspector-General within whose
rity Force
Courts. command the trial was held, or to the prescribed officer, and
such officer, or the Director General or any officer
empowered by him in this behalf may, for reasons based on
the merits of the case, but not on merely technical grounds,
set aside the proceedings, or reduce the sentence to any other
sentence which the court might have passed.

Alteration of 116. (1) Where a finding of guilty by a Security Force
finding or
sentence in Court, which has been confirmed or which does not require
certain cases. confirmation, is found for any reason to be invalid or cannot
be supported by the evidence, the authority which would have

[PAGE 54]
BSF ACT 53

had power under section 128 to commute the punishment
awarded by the sentence if the finding had been valid, may
substitute a new finding and pass a sentence for the offence
specified or involved in such finding.

Provided that no such substitution shall be made
unless such finding could have been validly made by the
Security Force Court on the charge and unless it appears that
the Security Force Court must have been satisfied of the facts
establishing the said offence.

(2) Where a sentence passed by a Security Force
Court which has been confirmed, or which does not require
confirmation, not being a sentence passed in pursuance of a
new finding substituted under sub-section (1), is found for
any reason to be invalid, the authority referred to in subsection (1) may pass a valid sentence.

(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence
passed under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be
higher in the scale of punishments than, or in excess of, the
punishment awarded by, the sentence for which a new
sentence is substituted under this section.

(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence
passed, under this section shall, for the purposes of this Act
and the rules, have effect as if it were a finding or sentence,
as the case may be, of a Security Force Court.

117. (1) Any person subject to this Act who R e m e d y
considers himself aggrieved by any order passed by any aginst order,
finding or
Security Force Court may present a petition to the officer sentence of
or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence S e c u r i t y
Force Court.
of such Security Force Court, and the confirming authority
may take such steps as may be considered necessary to
satisfy itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of
the order passed or as to the regularity of any proceeding
to which the order relates.

[PAGE 55]
54 BSF ACT

(2) Any person subject to this Act who considers
himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of any Security
Force Court which has been confirmed, may present a petition
to the Central Government, the Director-General, or any
prescribed officer superior in command to the one who
confirmed such finding or sentence, and the Central
Government, the Director-General, or the prescribed officer,
as the case may be, may pass such order thereon as it or he
thinks fit.

Annulment 118. The Central Government, the Director-General, or
of proceedings. any prescribed officer may annul the proceedings of any
Security Force Court on the ground that they are illegal
or unjust.

[PAGE 56]
BSF ACT 55

CHAPTER-IX

EXECUTION OF SENTENCE, PARDONS,
REMISSION, ETC

119. In awarding a sentence of death, a Security Force Form of sen-
Court shall, in its discretion direct that the offender shall tence of death.
suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead, or
shall suffer death by being shot to death.

120. Whenever any person is sentenced by a Security Force Commencement of sen-
Court under this Act to imprisonment, the term of his sentence tence of imshall, whether it has been revised or not, be reckoned to prisonment.
commence on the day on which the original proceedings were
signed by the presiding officer, or in the case of a Summary
Security Force Court by the court.

121. (1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is Execution of
passed under this Act by a Security Force Court or whenever sentence of i m p r i s o n any sentence of death is commuted to imprisonment, the ment.
confirming officer or in case of a Summary Security Force
Court the officer holding the court or such other officer as
may be prescribed shall, save as otherwise provided in subsections (3) and (4) direct that the sentence shall be carried
out by confinement in a civil prison.

(2) When a direction has been made under subsection (1) the Commandant of the person under sentence or
such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a
warrant in the prescribed form to the officer in charge of the
prison in which such person is to be confined and shall
arrange for his despatch to such prison with the warrant.

(3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment
for a period not exceeding three months and passed under
this Act by a Security Force Court, the appropriate officer
under sub-section (1) may direct that the sentence shall be
carried out by confinement in Force custody instead of in a
civil prison.

[PAGE 57]
56 BSF ACT

(4) On active duty, a sentence of imprisonment
may be carried out by confinement in such place as the
Deputy Inspector-General within whose command the person
sentenced is serving or any prescribed officer, may from time
to time appoint.

Period of 1121A. When any person subject to this Act is sentenced by 47 of 1968.
custody un- a Security Force Court to a term of imprisonment, not beingdergone by a
person to be an imprisonment in default of payment of fine, the period
s e t - o f f spent by him in civil or Force custody doing investigation,against the
i m p r i s o n - inquiry or trial of the same case, and before the date of order
ment. of such sentence, shall be set off against the term of
imprisonment imposed upon him, and the liability of such
person to undergo imprisonment on such order of sentence
shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the term of
imprisonment imposed upon him.

Temporary 122. Where a sentence of imprisonment is directed to be
custody of of- undergone in a civil prison the offender may be kept in Forcefender.
custody or in any other fit place, till such time as it is possible
to send him to a civil prison.

Execution of 123. Whenever, in the opinion of an officer not below the
sentence of
i m p r i s o n - rank of Deputy Inspector-General within whose command
ment in spe- the trial is held, any sentence or portion of a sentence of
cial cases.
imprisonment cannot for special reasons, conveniently be
carried out in Force custody in accordance with the provisions
of section 121, such officer may direct that such sentence or
portion of sentence shall be carried out, by confinement in
any civil prison or other fit place.

Conveyance 124. A person under sentence of imprisonment may during
of prisoner his conveyance from place to place, or when on board ship,from place to
place. aircraft, or otherwise, be subjected to such restraint as is
necessary for his safe conduct and removal.

Communica- 125. Whenever an order is duly made under this Act setting
tion of certain orders to aside or varying any sentence, order or warrant under which
prison offic- any person is confined in a civil prison, a warrant in
ers.
accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer

1. Ins. by amendment No.35 of 2000 dated 01-9-2000.

[PAGE 58]
BSF ACT 57

making the order or his staff officer or such other person as
may be prescribed, to the officer in charge of the prison in
which such person is confined.

126. When a sentence of fine is imposed by a Security Execution of
Force Court under section 46, a copy of such sentence signed sentence of fine.
and certified by the confirming officer, or where no
confirmation is required, by the officer holding the trial may
be sent to any magistrate in India, and such magistrate shall
thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in accordance with
5 of 1898. the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, as
if it were a sentence of fine imposed by such magistrate.

127. Whenever any person is sentenced to imprisonment Informality
under this Act, and is undergoing the sentence in any place or error in the order or waror manner in which he might be confined under a lawful rant.
order or warrant in pursuance of this Act, the confinement
of such person shall not be deemed to be illegal only by reason
of informality or error in, or as respects, the order, warrant
or other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance
whereof such person was brought into, or is confined in any
such place and any such order, warrant or document may be
amended accordingly.

128. When any person subject to this Act has been Pardon and
convicted by a Security Force Court of any offence, the remission.
Central Government or the Director-General or, in the case
of a sentence, which he could have confirmed or which did
not require confirmation, an officer not below the rank of
Deputy Inspector-General within whose command such
person at the time of conviction was serving, or the prescribed
officer may:-

(a) either with or without conditions which the
person sentenced accepts, pardon the person
or remit the whole or any part of the
punishment awarded; or

(b) mitigate the punishment awarded; or

(c) commute such punishment for any less

[PAGE 59]
58 BSF ACT

punishment or punishments mentioned in this
Act;

(d) either with or without conditions which the
person sentenced accepts, release the person
on parole.

Cancellation 129. (1) If any condition on which a person has been
of conditional par- pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has been
don, release remitted is, in the opinion of the authority which granted the
on parole or
remission. pardon, release or remission, not fulfilled, such authority may
cancel the pardon, release or remission and thereupon the
sentence of the court shall be carried into effect as if such
pardon, release or remission had not been granted.

(2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is
carried into effect under the provisions of sub-section (1)
shall undergo only the unexpired portion of his sentence.

Suspension 130. (1) Where a person subject to this Act is
of sentence
of imprison- sentenced by a Security Force Court to imprisonment, the
ment. Central Government, the Director-General or any officer
empowered to convene a General Security Force Court may
suspend the sentence whether or not the offender has already
been committed to prison or to Force custody.

(2) The authority or officer specified in subsection (1) may, in the case of an offender so sentenced direct
that until the orders of such authority or officer have been
obtained the offender shall not be committed to prison or to
Force custody.

(3) The powers conferred by sub-sections (1) and
(2) may be exercised in the case of any such sentence which
has been confirmed, reduced or commuted.

Orders pend- 131. (1) Where the sentence referred to in section 130
ing suspension. is imposed by a Security Force Court other than a Summary
Security Force Court, the confirming officer may, when
confirming the sentence, direct that the offender be not

[PAGE 60]
BSF ACT 59

committed to prison or to Force custody until the orders of
the authority or officer specified in section 130, have been
obtained.

(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed
by a Summary Security Force Court, the officer holding the
trial or the officer authorised to approve of the sentence under
sub-section (2) of section 114 may make the direction referred
to in sub-section (1).

132. Where a sentence is suspended under section 130, Release on
the offender shall forthwith be released from custody. suspension.

133. Any period during which the sentence is under C o m p u t a tion of pesuspension shall be reckoned as part of the term of such riod of sussentence. pension.

134. The authority or officer specified in section 130 may, Order after
at any time while a sentence is suspended, order- suspension.

(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the
unexpired portion of the sentence; or

(b) that the sentence be remitted.

135. (1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the Reconsideracase may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than tion of case after suspenfour months, be reconsidered by the authority or officer sion.
specified in section 130, or by any officer not below the rank
of a Deputy Inspector-General duly authorised by the
authority or officer specified in section 130.

(2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer
so authorised it appears to him that the conduct of offender
since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission
of the sentence, he shall refer the matter to the authority or
officer specified in section 130.

136. Where an offender, while a sentence on him is Fresh sensuspended under this Act, is sentenced for any other tence after suspension.
offence, then:-

[PAGE 61]
60 BSF ACT

(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under
this Act, the two sentences shall run concurrently;

(b) if the further sentence is for a period of three
months or more and is not suspended under this Act, the
offender shall also be committed to prison or Force custody
for the unexpired portion of the previous sentence, but both
sentences shall run concurrently; and

(c) if the further sentence is for a period of less
than three months and is not suspended under this Act, the
offender shall be so committed on that sentence only, and
the previous sentence shall, subject to any order which may
be passed under section 134 or section 135 continue to be
suspended.

Scope of 137. The powers conferred by sections 130 and 134 shall
power of
suspension. be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the power of
mitigation, remission and commutation.

Effect of 138. (1) Where in addition to any other sentence
suspension
and remis- the punishment of dismissal has been awarded by a
sion on dis- Security Force Court and such other sentence is
missal. suspended under section 130, then, such dismissal shall
not take effect until so ordered by the authority or officer
specified in section 130.

(2) If such other sentence is remitted under
section 134, the punishment of dismissal shall also be
remitted.

[PAGE 62]
BSF ACT 61

CHAPTER-X

MISCELLANEOUS

139. (1) The Central government may, by general or Powers and
special order published in the Official Gazette direct that, duties con- ferrable and
subject to such conditions and limitations, and within the imposable
local limits of such area adjoining the borders of India, as on members of the Force.
may be specified in the order, any member of the Force may:-

34 of 1920. (i) for the purpose of prevention of any offence
16 of 1939.
1 of 1944. punishable under the Passport (Entry into India) Act,
31 of 1946. 1920, the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, the
7 of 1947.
52 of 1962. Central Excises and Sale Act, 1944, the Foreigners
15 of 1967. Act, 1946, the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act,
1947, the Customs Act, 1962 or the Passports Act,
1967 or of any cognizable offence punishable under
any other Central Act; or

(ii) for the purpose of apprehending any person who
has committed any offence referred to in clause (i),

exercise or discharge such of the powers or duties under that
Act or any other Central Act as may be specified in the said
order, being the powers and duties which, in the opinion of
the Central Government, an officer of the corresponding or
lower rank is by that or such other Act empowered to exercise
or discharge for the said purposes.

(2) The Central Government may, by general or
special order published in the Official Gazette, confer or
impose, with the concurrence of the State Government
concerned, any of the powers or duties which may be
exercised or discharged under a State Act by a police officer
upon a member of the Force who, in the opinion of the Central
Government, holds a corresponding or higher rank.

(3) Every order made under this section shall be
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty

[PAGE 63]
62 BSF ACT

days which may be comprised in one session or in two
successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session
in which it is so laid or the session immediately following,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the order
or both Houses agree that the order should not be made,
the order shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that order.

Protection for 140. (1) In any suit or proceeding against any member
acts of members of the of the Force for any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant
Force. or order of a competent authority, it shall be lawful for him
to plead that such act was done by him under the authority of
such warrant or order.

(2) Any such plea may be proved by the
production of the warrant or order directing the act, and if it
is so proved the member of the Force shall thereupon be
discharged from liability in respect of the act so done by
him, not-with-standing any defect in the jurisdiction of the
authority which issued such warrant or order.

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, any legal proceeding
(whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought
against any member of the Force for anything done or
intended to be done under the powers conferred by, or in
pursuance of any provision of this Act or the rules, shall be
commenced within three months after the act complained of
was committed and not otherwise, and notice in writing of
such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall be given to
the defendant or his superior officer atleast one month before
the commencement of such proceeding.

Power to 141. (1) The Central Government may, by notification,
make rules.
make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the
provisions of this Act.

[PAGE 64]
BSF ACT 63

(2) in particular and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for:-

(a) the constitution, governance, command and
discipline of the Force;

(b) the enrolment of persons to the Force and the
recruitment of other members of the Force;

(c) the conditions of service (including
deductions from pay and allowances) of
members of the Force;

(d) the rank, precedence, powers of command
and authority of the officers, subordinate
officers, under-officers and other persons
subject to this Act;

(e) the removal, retirement, release or discharge
from the service of persons subject to this
Act;

(f) the purposes and other matters required to be
prescribed under section 13;

(g) the convening, constitution, adjournment,
dissolution and sittings of Security Force
Courts, the procedure to be observed in trials
by such courts, the persons by whom an
accused may be defended in such trials and
the appearance of such persons there at;

(h) the confirmation, revision and annulment of,
and petitions against, the finding and
sentences of Security Force Courts;

(i) the forms or orders to be made under the
provisions of this Act relating to Security
Force Courts and the awards and infliction
of death, imprisonment and detention;

(j) the carrying into effect of sentences of
Security Force Courts;

[PAGE 65]
64 BSF ACT

(k) any matter necessary for the purpose of
carrying this Act into execution, as far as it
relates to the investigation, arrest, custody,
trial and punishment of offences triable or
punishable under this Act;

(l) the ceremonials to be observed and marks of
respect to be paid in the Force;

(m) the convening of, the constitution, procedure
and practice of, Courts of inquiry, the
summoning of witnesses before them and the
administration of oaths by such Courts;

(n) the recruitment and conditions of service of
the Chief Law Officer and the Law Officers;

(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be
prescribed or in respect of which this Act
makes no provision or makes insufficient
provision and provision is, in the opinion of
the Central Government, necessary for the
proper implementation of this Act.

(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in one session or in two
successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session
in which it is so laid or the session immediately following,
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.

Provisions as 142. (1) The Border Security Force in existence at the
to existing
Border Secu- commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Force
rity Force. constituted under this Act.

(2) Members of the Border Security Force in
existence at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed

[PAGE 66]
BSF ACT 65

to have been appointed or as the case may be, enrolled as
such under this Act.

(3) Anything done or any action taken before the
commencement of this Act in relation to the constitution of
the Border Security Force referred to in sub-section (1), in
relation to any person appointed or enrolled, as the case may
be, thereto, shall be as valid and as effective in law as if such
thing or action was done or taken under this Act.

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render
any person guilty of any offence in respect of anything done
or omitted to be done by him before the commencement of
this Act.

[PAGE 67]
66 BSF RULES

S.O. 2336 dated the 9th June, 1969 - In exercise of
the powers conferred by sub-section (1) and (2) of section
141 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968, (47 of 1968),
the Central Government hereby makes the following rules,
Namely:-

THE BORDER SECURITY FORCE RULES, 1969

CHAPTER - I

PRELIMINARY

1. Short title and application - (1) These rules may be
called the Border Security Force Rules, 1969.

(2) They shall come into force on the date of their
publication in the official Gazette.]1

(3) These rules shall apply to all persons subject to the Act.

Provided that the provisions of Chapter-IV thereof
shall not apply to persons belonging to the All India Services
and other Government servants who are on deputation with
the Border Security Force.

2 [Provided further that the provisions of Chapter-IX &
X thereof shall not apply to trial by SSFCs in so far as they are
inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in Chapter-
XI thereof pertaining to Summary Security Force Courts].

2. Definitions - In these rules, unless the context
otherwise requires,-

(a) “the Act” means the Border Security Force
Act, 1968 (47 of 1968),
(b) “Appendix” means an Appendix annexed to
these rules,

1. Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part-II, Section 3
(ii), dated the 13th June, 1969.
2. Ins. by S.O. 329 (E), dated 29.04.1981.

[PAGE 68]
BSF RULES 67

(c) “Court” means the security Force Court,
(d) “Detachment” includes any part of the
battalion required or ordered to proceed on
duty away from Headquarters,
(e) “Proper Force authority” when used in
relation to any power, duty, act or matter,
means such Force authority as, in pursuance
of these rules made under the Act, exercises,
or performs that power or duty or is
concerned with that matter.
(f) “Section” means a section of the Act,
(g) All words and expressions used in these rules
and defined in the Act shall have the same
meaning as in the Act.

3. Reports and applications - Any report or application
directed by these rules to be made to a superior officer, or to
a proper Force authority shall be made in writing through
the proper channel, unless the said authority, on account of
exigencies of service or otherwise, dispenses with the writing.

4. Forms in appendices - (1) The forms set forth in the
appendices, with such variations as the circumstances of each
case may require, may be used for the respective purposes
therein mentioned, and if used shall be sufficient, but a
deviation from such forms shall not, by reason only of such
deviation, render invalid any charge, warrant, order,
proceedings or any other documents relevant to these rules.

(2) Any omission of any such form shall not, by reason
only of such omission, render any act or thing invalid.

(3) The directions in the notes to and the instructions in
the form shall be duly complied with in all cases to which
they relate, but any omission to comply with any such
direction in the notes or instructions shall not, merely by
reason of such omission render any act or thing invalid.

5. Exercise of power vested in holder of an office in
the Force. - Any power or jurisdiction given to any person

[PAGE 69]
68 BSF RULES

holding any office in the Force to do any act or thing to, or
before any person, may, for the purposes of these rules, be
exercised by any other person who may, for the time being,
be performing the functions of that office in accordance with
the rules and practice of the Force.

6. Case unprovided for. - In regard to any matter not
specifically provided for in these rules, it shall be lawful for
the competent authority to do such thing or take such action
as may be just and proper in the circumstances of the case.

[PAGE 70]
BSF RULES 69

CHAPTER - II

RECRUITMENT

7. Disqualification - No person, -

(a) who has entered into or contracted a marriage
with a person having a spouse living, or

(b) who, having a spouse living, has entered into
or contracted a marriage with any person shall
be eligible for appointment in the Force.

Provided that the Central Government may, if
satisfied, that such marriage is permissible under the personal
law applicable to such person and the other party to the
marriage and that there are other grounds for so doing, exempt
any person from the operation of this rule.

8. Ineligibility of aliens - No person who is not a citizen
of India shall, except with the consent of the Central
Government signified in writing, be appointed, enrolled or
employed in the Force.

Provided that nothing contained in this rule shall bar
the appointment, enrolment or employment of a subject of
Nepal, Sikkim or Bhutan in the Force.

9. Appointment of officers - The Central Government
may appoint such persons as it considers to be suitable as
officers in the Force, and their conditions of service shall be
such as may be provided in the rules made in this behalf by
the Central Government.

10. Probation - (1) An officer on first appointment to
the Force shall be on probation for a period of two years and
the Central Government may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, extend the period of probation for such further period
or periods not exceeding one year.
1. Rule-7 Substituted SO 188 (E) dated 13 Mar 1993.
2. The words “against a permanent post” in sub rule -1 of
Rule-10 deleted by S.O. 188 (E) dated 13 Mar 1993.

[PAGE 71]
70 BSF RULES

(2) The Central Government may, during the period of
probation, terminate the services of an officer without
assigning any reasons.

11. Appointment of Subordinate Officers and under
Officers - Appointments to the posts of Subedars, Sub-
Inspectors and Under Officers for the Force may be made by
the Inspector-General, the Deputy Inspector-General and the
Commandant respectively:

(a) by direct recruitment;

(b) by deputation from the Army, Navy, Air
Force, State Police Force, or any other Department of the Central Government or of the
State Government;

(c) by promotion as may be prescribed from time
to time.

1[11-A.Commissions - (1) Officers referred to in rule 9 and
Subedars and Sub-Inspectors referred to in rule 11 may be
granted commissions as such by the President.

(2) The grant of the commission shall be notified
in the Official Gazette and such notification shall be
conclusive proof of the grant of such commission.

12. Enrolling Officers - For the purposes of enrolment
of persons to the Force under section 6, the following persons
shall be enrolling officers:-

(a) Commandants of all battalions; and

(b) any other officer of the Force who may be
appointed as enrolling officer by the Director-General.

13. Procedure for enrolment, mode of enrolment and
other matters connected therewith - (1) Upon the

1. Ins. by S.O. 1362, dated 7.4.1970.

[PAGE 72]
BSF RULES 71

appearance before the enrolling officer of any person desirous
of being enrolled, the enrolling officer shall read and explain
to him, or cause to be read and explained to him in his
presence, the conditions of service for which he is to be
enrolled; and shall put to him the questions contained in the
form of enrolment set out in Appendix I and shall, after
having cautioned him that if he makes a false answer to any
such questions he shall be liable to punishment under the
Act, record or cause to be recorded his answer to each such
question.

(2) If, after complying with the provisions of sub-rule
(1) and such other directions as may be issued in this behalf
by the Director-General from time to time, the enrolling
officer is satisfied that the person desirous of being enrolled,
fully understands the questions put to him and consents to
the conditions of service, and if the said officer is satisfied
that there is no impediment, he shall sign and shall also cause
such person to sign the enrolment paper and such person
shall thereupon be deemed to be enrolled.

(3) (a) Every person enrolled as a member of the
Force under sub-rule (2) shall be administered an oath or
affirmation in the form set out in Appendix-I.

(b) The oath or affirmation shall as far as possible
be administered by the Commandant of the person to be
attested or in the unavoidable absence of the Commandant
by the person authorised in writing by the Commandant in
this behalf.

(c) The oath or affirmation shall be administered
when the person to be attested has completed his training.

[PAGE 73]
72 BSF RULES

CHAPTER-III

ORGANISATION

1[14. Constitution of the Force. - (1) Border Security
Force shall consist of:-

(a) Border Security Force (Regular)
(b) Border Security Force (Auxiliary)

(2) Officers, subordinate officers and enrolled
persons appointed to or enrolled into the Border Security
Force (Regular) shall be liable for continuous service for the
term mentioned in their enrolment form, letter of appointment
or in the rules made in this behalf.

(3) Officers, subordinate officers and enrolled persons
appointed to or enrolled in to the Border Security Force (Auxiliary)
shall serve as and when they are called out for service by the Director-
General with the consent of the Central Government or for training
under the order of the Director-General.

2[14A. Ranks.- (1) The officers and other members of the
Force shall be classified in accordance with their ranks in
the following categories namely:-

(a) Officers
(1) Director-General
2[(2) Additional Director General
3[(3) Inspector-General
(4) Deputy Inspector General
(5) Additional Deputy Inspector General
(6) Commandant
(7) Deputy Commandant
(8) Assistant Commandant
(b) Subordinate Officers
(9) Subedar Major
(10) Subedar
(11) Sub-Inspector
1. Ins. by S. O. 4034, dated 21.10.1971
2. Renumbered by ibid.
3. Subs. by S. O. 436 (E), dated 29.5.1990

[PAGE 74]
BSF RULES 73

(c) Under Officers
(12) Head Constable
(13) Naik
(14) Lance Naik

(d) Enrolled persons other than Under Officers

(15) Constable.
(16) Enrolled followers

(2) Matters relating to Inter-se seniority of
persons belonging to the same rank shall be determined in
accordance with such rules as may be made in this behalf.

1(3) Notwithstanding any thing contained in these
rules, the Director General may,-

(i) subject to confirmation by the Central
Government as provided hereinafter, grant to
an officer or subedar of the Force a rank,
mentioned against Sr No.(6), (7) and (8), in
clause (a) of sub-rule (1), as a local rank:

(ii) subject to prior approval of the Central
Government, grant to an officer of the Force a
rank mentioned against Sr No.(2), (3), (4) and
(5) in clause (a) of sub rule (1), as a local rank;
whenever as considered necessary by him in
the interest of better functioning of the force.
(4) An officer or 2(**)subedar of the Force holding
a local rank:-
(a) shall exercise the command and be vested with
the powers of an officer holding that rank;
(b) shall cease to hold that rank, if the grant of such
rank is not confirmed within twenty one days
by the Central Govt or when so ordered by the
Director General or when he ceases to hold the
3(***) appointment for which the rank was granted;
[Explanation]

1. Amended by SO, 55(E) date 01-02-1999
2. Ins. By SO 155 (E) date 01-03-1983
3. Explanation omitted by SO 436 (E) date 29-05-1990.

[PAGE 75]
74 BSF RULES

(c) shall not be entitled to any extra pay and
allowances for holding such rank;

(d) shall not be entitled to claim any seniority
over other officer of the Force by virtue of
having held such rank.

15. The task of the Force and Command and Control
thereto.- (1) For the purpose of sub-section (1) of section 4,
the Force shall:-

(i) promote a sense of security among the
people living in the border area.

(ii) prevent trans-border crimes, unauthorised entry into or exit from the
territory of India.

(iii) prevent smuggling and any other
illegal activity.

(2) In discharging the functions under sub-rule
(1), the responsibility for the command, discipline, morale
and administration shall:-

(a) in the case of Inspector General, extend to all
battalions, units, headquarters,
establishments and Force personnel placed
under him 1 [***];

(b) in the case of a Deputy Inspector General,
extend to all the battalions, other personnel
and units placed under him 1[***]; and

(c) in the case of a Commandant, extend to the
battalion or unit placed under him 1[***].

1. Omitted by SO 436 (E) date 29-05-1990.

[PAGE 76]
BSF RULES 75

(3) During hostilities, the Inspector General, the
Deputy Inspector General and the commandant shall
discharge such functions as may be assigned by their
respective superiors.

(4) The command, discipline, administration and
training of battalions, unit and establishment not placed under
a Deputy Inspector General or an Inspector General shall be
carried out by such officers and in such manner as may from
time to time be laid down by the Director General.

(5) Any member of the Force shall be liable to
perform any duties in connection with the safeguarding of the
security of the border of India, the administration, discipline
and welfare of the Force and such other duties as he may be
called upon to perform in accordance with any law for the time
being in force and any order given in this behalf by a superior
officer shall be a lawful command for the purposes of the Act.

16. Command - (1) An officer appointed to command
shall have the power of command over all officers and men,
irrespective of seniority placed under his command.

(2) (a) In the contingency of an officer being unable
to exercise the command, to which he has
been appointed, due to any reason, the
command shall devolve on the second-incommand, if one has been so appointed.

(b) If no second-in-command has been appointed,
it shall devolve, on the officer who may be
appointed to officiate by the immediate superior
of the officer unable to exercise command.

(c) If no such officer has been so appointed,
command shall devolve on the senior most
officer present.

(d) The inability of an officer to exercise
command and its assumption by any other

[PAGE 77]
76 BSF RULES

officer in accordance with this sub-rule shall
be immediately reported to Force
Headquarters by the officer who has assumed
command.

(3) If persons belonging to different battalions
and units are working together :-

(i) in regard to the specific task on which
they are engaged, the officer
appointed to command or in his
absence the senior most officer
present shall exercise command over
all such persons;

(ii) in all other matters the senior officer
belonging to each battalion shall
exercise command over persons
belonging to his battalion.

(4) When officers and other persons belonging
to the Force are taken prisoner by an enemy the exiting
relations of superior and subordinate and the duty of
obedience shall remain unaltered and any person guilty of
indiscipline or insubordination in this behalf shall, after his
release, be liable for punishment.

(5) Disciplinary powers over a person subject to
the Act shall be exercised by the Commandant of the battalion
or unit to which such a person belongs or the officer on whom
command has devolved in accordance with sub-rule (2).

(6) Where such a person is doing detachment
duty, including attendance at a course of instruction the
Commandant of the battalion, unit, centre or establishment
with which he is doing such duty shall also have all the
disciplinary power of a Commandant.

[PAGE 78]
BSF RULES 77

(7) The Director General, the Inspector General
and the Deputy Inspector General may specify one or more
officers of the staff who shall exercise the disciplinary powers
of a Commandant in respect of persons belonging to or doing
detachment duty at their respective Headquarters.

Explanation - In this rule, except in sub-rule (2) the
word “officer” shall include a subordinate officer and an
under officer.

[PAGE 79]
78 BSF RULES

CHAPTER-IV

TERMINATION OF SERVICE

17. Retirement on ground of unsuitability - (1) Where
the Director General is of the opinion that an officer is unfit
to be retained in service, he may recommend to the Central
Government that the officer be retired from service.

(2) He shall also forward to the Central
Government the reason for his recommendation alongwith
the record of service of the officer.

(3) The Central Government may on receipt of
such recommendation and after giving the officer an
opportunity to explain his case pass such order as it may
deem fit.

Provided that where in the interest of security of the
State it would be inexpedient so to do it shall be lawful for
the Government to pass an order as aforesaid without giving
the officer the opportunity to explain his case.

18. Retirement on grounds of physical unfitness - (1)
Where an officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector
General considers that an officer of the Force is unfit to
perform his duties because of his physical conditions, the
officer shall be brought before a medical board.

(2) The medical board shall consist of such
officers and shall be constituted in such manner as may, from
time to time, be laid down by the Director General.

(3) Where the medical board considers the officer
to be unfit for service, the Central Government shall
communicate to the said officer the findings of the medical
board and thereupon, with in a period of fifteen days of such
communication, the officer may make a representation
against it to the Central Government.

[PAGE 80]
BSF RULES 79

(4) The Central Government may, on receiving
the representation from the officer, refer the case to be
reviewed by a fresh medical board constituted for the purpose
and order the retirement of the said officer if the decision of
the fresh medical board is adverse to him.

19. Resignation - (1) The Central Government may,
having regard to the special circumstances of any case, permit
any officer of the Force to resign from the Force before the
attainment of the age of retirement or before putting in such
number of years of service as may be necessary under the
rules to be eligible for retirement.

Provided that while granting such permission the
Central Government may:-

(i) require the officer to refund to the
Government such amount as would constitute the cost
of training given to that officer 1[or three months pay
and allowances, whichever is higher, or Provided
further that an officer of the Force tendering
resignation, for accepting a job under Central or State
Governments or local bodies, after having been
granted cadre clearance for the same or who has
completed 10 years of service shall not be required
to refund the sum as provided here in above.

(2) The Central Government may accept the
resignation under sub rule (1) with effect from such date as
it may consider expedient.

(3) The Central Government may refuse to permit
an officer to resign:

(a) if an emergency has been declared in the
Country either due to internal disturbances
or external aggression; or

(b) if considers it to be inexpedient so to do 2[due
to exigencies of service or in the interests of
the discipline of the Force; or
1. Ins by SO 1686, dated 31-05-1996
2. Ins by SO 166 dated 14-01-1998

[PAGE 81]
80 BSF RULES

(c) if the officer has specifically undertaken to
serve for a specified period and such period
has not expired.

(4) The provisions of this rule, shall apply to and
in relation to subordinate Officer and Enrolled Persons as
they apply to and in relation to any officer of the Force and
the powers vested in the Central Government under sub-rules
(1) and (2) shall be exercised in the case of a Subordinate
Officer by a Deputy Inspector General and in the case of an
Enrolled Person by a Commandant.

1[20. Termination of service of officers by the Central
Government on account of misconduct] (1) when it is
proposed to terminate the service of an officer under section
10 on account of mis-conduct, he shall be given an
opportunity to show cause in the manner specified in subrule (2) against such action:-

Provided that this sub-rule shall not apply:-

(a) where the service is terminated on the
ground of conduct which has led to his conviction by a criminal court or a Security
Force Court; or

(b) where the Central Government is satisfied
that for reasons, to be recorded in writing, it
is not expedient or reasonably practicable to
give to the officer an opportunity of showing
cause.

(2) When after considering the reports on an
officer’s misconduct, the Central Government or the Director
General, as the case may be, is satisfied that the trial of the
Officer by a Security Force Court is in-expedient or
impracticable, but is of the opinion, that the further retention

1. Rule 20,21,22 Subs. by S.O. 436 (E) dt. 29.5.1990.

[PAGE 82]
BSF RULES 81

of the said officer in the service is undesirable, the Director
General shall so inform the officer together with particulars
of allegation and report of investigation (including the
statements of witnesses, if any, recorded and copies of
documents if any, intended to be used against him) in cases
where allegations have been investigated and he shall be
called upon to submit, in writing, his explanation and defence:

Provided that the Director General may with hold
disclosure of such report or portion thereof if, in his opinion,
its disclosure is not in the interest of the security of the State.

(3) In the event of explanation of the Officer
being considered unsatisfactory by the Director-General, or
when so directed by the Central Government, the case shall
be submitted to the Central Government with the Officer’s
defence and the recommendations of the Director-General
as to the termination of the Officer’s service in the manner
specified in sub-rule (4).

(4) When submitting a case to the Central
Government under the provision of sub-rule (2) or sub-rule
(3), the Director-General shall make his recommendation
whether the Officer’s service should be terminated, and if
so, whether the officer should be,-

(a) dismissed from the service; or
(b) removed from the service; or
(c) retired from the service; or
(d) called upon to resign.

(5) The Central Government, after considering
the reports and the officer’s defence, if any, or the judgement
of the Criminal Court, as the case may be, and the
recommendation of the Director-General, may remove or
dismiss the officer with or without pension, or retire or get
his resignation from service, and on his refusing to do so,
the officer may be compulsorily retired or removed from the
service with pension or gratuity, if any, admissible to him.

[PAGE 83]
82 BSF RULES

21. Termination of service of officers by the Central
Government on grounds other than mis-conduct-(1) When
the Director General is satisfied that an officer is unsuitable to
be retained in service, the officer.-

(a) shall be so informed;
(b) shall be furnished with particulars of all matters adverse to him; and
(c) shall be called upon to urge any reasons he
may wish to put forward in favour of his retention in the service:

Provided that clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall not apply,
if the Central Government is satisfied that, for reasons, to be
recorded by it in writing, it is not expedient or reasonably
practicable to comply with the provisions thereof:

Provided further that the Director-General may not
furnish to the officer any matter adverse to him, if in his
opinion, it is not in the interest of the security of the state to
do so.
(2) In the event of the explanation being
considered by the Director General unsatisfactory, the matter
shall be submitted to the Central Government for orders,
together with the officer’s explanation and the
recommendation of the Director General.

(3) The Central Government after considering the
reports, the explanation, if any, of the officer and the
recommendation of the Director General, may call upon the
officer to retire or resign and on his refusing to do so, the
officer may be compulsorily retired from the service with
pension or gratuity, if any, admissible to him.

22. Dismissal or removal of persons other than
officers on account of mis-conduct. (1) When it is proposed
to terminate the service of a person subject to the Act other
than an officer, he shall be given an opportunity by the
authority competent to dismiss or remove him, to show cause
in the manner specified in sub-rule (2) against such action:

[PAGE 84]
BSF RULES 83

Provided that this sub-rule shall not apply -

(a) where the service is terminated on the ground
of conduct which has led to his conviction by
a criminal court or a Security Force Court; or

(b) where the competent authority is satisfied
that, for reasons to be recorded in writing, it
is not expedient or reasonably practicable to
give the person concerned an opportunity or
showing cause.

(2) When after considering the reports on the
mis-conduct of the person concerned, the competent
authority is satisfied that the trial of such a person is
inexpedient or impracticable, but, is of the opinion that his
further retention in the service is undesirable, it shall so
inform him together with all reports adverse to him and he
shall be called upon to submit, in writing, his explanation
and defence:

Provided that the competent authority may withhold from disclosure any such report or portion thereof,
if, in his opinion its disclosure is not in the public
interest.

(3) The competent authority after considering his
explanation and defence if any may dismiss or remove him
from service with or without pension:

Provided that a Deputy Inspector General shall not
dismiss or remove from service, a Subordinate Officer of
and above the rank of a Subedar.

(4) All cases of dismissal or removal under this
rule, shall be reported to the Director General.

23. Dismissal or removal by Central Government-Where
the Central Government is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, that:-

[PAGE 85]
84 BSF RULES

(i) it is not reasonably practicable to
follow the procedure laid down in the
said rules; or

(ii) it is not expedient, in the interests of
the security of the State, to follow
such procedure, it may order the
dismissal or removal from the Force
of a person subject to the Act without
following the procedure laid down in
rules 20 and 21.

1[23A. Termination of service on conviction on a criminal
charge.- When a person subject to the Act is convicted of a
civil offence the competent authority may dismiss or remove
him from service without holding any inquiry or issuing a
show cause notice.

24. Retirement of subordinate officers and enrolled
persons.- A subordinate officer or an enrolled person shall
on the fulfilment of the terms and conditions of service under
which he was appointed or enrolled be eligible to retire.

25. Retirement of subordinate officer and enrolled
persons on grounds of physical unfitness.- (1) Where a
Commandant is satisfied that a Subedar, Sub-Inspector or
an enrolled person is unable to perform his duties by reason
of any physical disability he may direct that the said Subedar,
Sub-Inspector or the enrolled person, as the case may be, to
be brought before a Medical Board.

(2) The Medical Board shall be constituted in
such manner as may be determined by the Director General.

(3) Where the said Subedar, Sub-Inspector or
enrolled person is found by the Medical Board to be unfit
for further service in the Force, the Inspector General, the
Deputy Inspector General or as the case may be, the
Commandant may, if he agrees with the finding of the
Medical Board order the retirement of the Subedar, the Sub-
Inspector, or as the case may be, the enrolled persons:

1. Ins. by S.O. 155 (E), dated 1-3-1983.

[PAGE 86]
BSF RULES 85

Provided that before the said Subedar or Sub-
Inspector or as the case may be, the enrolled person is so
retired the finding of the Medical Board and the decision to
retire him shall be communicated to him.

(4) The Subedar, the Sub-Inspector or, as the case
may be, the enrolled person may, within a period of fifteen
days from the date of receipt of such communication, make
a representation to the officer next superior in command to
the one who ordered the retirement.

(5) The said superior officer shall have the case
referred to a Review Medical Board which shall be
constituted in such manner as may be determined by the
Director General.

(6) The superior officer may, having regard to the
finding of the Review Medical Board, pass such order as he
may deem fit.

(7) Where a representation has been made to a
superior officer under sub-rule (4), an order passed under
sub-rule (3), shall not take effect till it is confirmed by such
superior officer.

1[26. Retirement of enrolled persons on grounds of
unsuitability.- Where a Commandant is satisfied that an
enrolled person is unsuitable to be retained in the Force, the
Commandant may, after giving such enrolled person an
opportunity of showing cause (except when he considers it
to be impracticable or inexpedient in the interest of security
of the State, to give such opportunity), retire such enrolled
person from the Force.

27. Retirement of subordinate officers on grounds of
unsuitability.- (1) Where a Deputy Inspector General is
satisfied that a Sub-Inspector is unsuitable to be retained in
the Force, he may, after giving such Sub-Inspector an
opportunity of showing cause (except when he considers it

1. Subs. by S.O. 436 (E), dated 29-5-1990.

[PAGE 87]
86 BSF RULES

to be impracticable or inexpedient in the interest of security
of State, to give such opportunity), retire the said Sub-
Inspector.

(2) Where an Inspector General is satisfied that
a Subedar or Subedar Major is unsuitable to be retained in
the Force, he may, after giving such Subedar or Subedar
Major an opportunity of showing cause (except when he
considers it to be impracticable or inexpedient in the interest
of security of State, to give such opportunity), retire such
Subedar or Subedar Major from the Force.

28. Power to be exercised by a superior officer or
authority.- Any power conferred by the provisions of this
Chapter on an officer may also be exercised by an officer
or authority superior in command to the first mentioned
officer.

1[28A. Petition.-2[Any person subject to the Act, who
considers himself aggrieved by any order of termination of
his service passed under this Chapter may; in the case of an
officer, present a petition to the Central Government, in the
case of an Assistant Sub Inspector or a subordinate officer,
present a petition to the Director General and in the case of
an enrolled person, present a petition to the Inspector General,
who may pass such orders on the petition as deemed fit].

Provided that the limitation period for filing such
petition shall be three months from the date of order of
termination or from the date of its receipt, whichever is later.

29. Passing of orders relating to absence from duty.- Where
an order of dismissal or of removal or of retirement of a person
subject to the Act is set aside, the officer or authority setting aside
such dismissal, removal or retirement shall pass such orders as
may be necessary in respect of the period of absence from duty of
the person whose dismissal, removal or retirement has been set
aside.

1. Ins. by S.O. 436 (E) , dated 29-5-1990.
2. Subs Vide S.O. 1866, dated 27.6.2003.

[PAGE 88]
BSF RULES 87

30. Date of dismissal, removal, resignation,
retirement.- The effective date of dismissal, resignation or
retirement shall be:-

(a) the date mentioned in the order of dismissal
or removal or order sanctioning or accepting
resignation or retirement; or

(b) if no such date is mentioned, the date on
which the order was signed or the date on
which the person concerned is relieved from
duties, whichever is later.

[PAGE 89]
88 BSF RULES

CHAPTER-V

ARREST AND INVESTIGATION

31. Forms of arrest. - (1) Arrest may be either open arrest
or close arrest.

(2) An arrest, unless otherwise specified shall
mean an open arrest.

(3) An order imposing arrest may be
communicated to the person to be arrested either orally or in
writing.

32. Authority to order arrest.- (1) No person subject
to this Act shall be arrested on a charge under the Act except
under and in accordance with the orders of a superior officer
having power of command over him.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subrule (1) any person subject to the Act may be placed under
arrest by any superior officer:-

(a) if he commits an offence against such superior
officer; or

(b) if he commits an offence in the view of such
superior officer; or

(c) if he is behaving in a disorderly manner and
the said superior officer considers it
necessary to place such a person under arrest
with a view to stop such disorderly
behaviour.

(3) A superior officer effecting arrest under subrule (2) shall as soon as possible, and in any case within
twenty four hours of such arrest send a report to the
Commandant of the battalion or unit of which the person
arrested is a member and in case of the arrest of an officer of

[PAGE 90]
BSF RULES 89

and above the rank of Commandant, to his immediate
superior officer.

33. Arrest how imposed.- (A) Close arrest-(1) (a) Close
arrest in the case of enrolled persons shall be imposed by
informing the person to be arrested and ordering him to be
marched to the place of confinement under an escort of
persons of similar or superior rank.

(b) Where no such escort is available the person
arrested shall be ordered to report himself immediately to
the quarter guard or other place of confinement.

(2) (a) Close arrest in the case of officers,
subordinate officers and under officers, shall be imposed
by placing such officer, subordinate officer or under officers
under the custody of another person of similar or superior
rank and wherever considered necessary such officer,
subordinate officer, or under officer may be confined under
charge of a guard.

(b) The person under arrest shall not leave his
quarter or tent without permission of a superior officer
designated by the Commandant in this behalf.

(B) Open arrest - (3) (a) Open arrest shall be
imposed by informing the person to be arrested (whether he
is an officer, subordinate officer, under officer or an enrolled
person) that he is under open arrest and that he shall confine
himself within such limits as may be specified in this behalf
by the concerned superior officer effecting such arrest.

(b) The Commandant may, from time to time,
vary the limits referred to in clause (a) above.

34. Release from arrest during investigation.- (1) Any
person arrested under rule 33 may be released from arrest
under the order of an Assistant Commandant, Deputy
Commandant, Commandant or any officer superior to the
Commandant.

[PAGE 91]
90 BSF RULES

(2) Subject to the provisions of rule 35, no person
except on the basis of any fresh evidence against him be rearrested.

35. Release without prejudice to re-arrest.- Pending
the completion of the investigation or convening of a Court
any person who has been placed under arrest may without
prejudice to re-arrest be released by his Commandant or by
any officer superior to his Commandant.

36. Arrest when to be imposed.- (1) Any person charged
with:

(i) an offence under section 14, or clause (a) or
clause (b) of section 16, or section 17 or section 20 or sub-section (1) of section 21.

(ii) a civil offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life.

(iii) any other offence under the Act:-

(a) if the interest of discipline so require,
or

(b) if the person concerned deliberately
undermines discipline, or

(c) if the person concerned is of violent
disposition, or

(d) if the person concerned is likely to
absent himself with a view to avoid
trial, or

(e) if the person concerned is likely to
interfere with witness or tamper with
evidence, shall be placed under arrest.

(2) Where any person arrested shows symptoms
of sickness, medical assistance shall be provided for such
person.

[PAGE 92]
BSF RULES 91

37. Special provision in case of arrest of intoxicated
person.- (1) Where an intoxicated person has been arrested,
he shall, as far as possible, be confined separately and shall
be visited by orderly officer or orderly subordinate officer or
orderly under officer or under officer incharge of the guard,
once every two hours.

(2) An intoxicated person shall not be taken
before a superior officer for investigation of his case until he
has become sober.

38. Arrest in case of person whose trial has been
ordered.- (1) Unless the convening officer has otherwise
directed, on the commencement of the trial of a person by
the Court, the said person shall be placed under arrest and
shall remain under arrest during the trial.

(2) Where a sentence lower than imprisonment is
passed by a Court the arrested person shall be released by his
Commandant pending confirmation of the finding and sentence:

Provided that a person who has been sentenced to be
dismissed shall not, except while on active duty, be put on
any duty.

39. Delay reports.- (1) (a) The report on reasons for delay
as required under section 59 shall be in the form set out in
Appendix-II and it shall be sent by the Commandant to the
Deputy Inspector General under whom the accused may be
serving.
(b) A copy of the eighth delay report and every
succeeding report thereof shall also be sent to the
Inspector General under whom the accused may be
serving.

(2) Where the accused is kept under arrest for a
period exceeding three months without being brought to trial,
a special report regarding the action taken and the reasons
for the delay shall be sent by the Commandant to the Director
General with a copy each to the Deputy Inspector General
and the Inspector General concerned.

[PAGE 93]
92 BSF RULES

40. Rights of a person under arrest.- (1) (a) Any person
placed under arrest shall, at the time of being placed under
arrest, be given in writing by the officer effecting the arrest
the particulars of the charges against him.

(b) The said particulars shall be rendered in
simple language and also explained to the
accused.

(c) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(a), where during the investigation other offences committed by the accused are discovered, it shall be lawful to charge such person
with those offences.

(2) (a) The orderly officer or the orderly Subordinate Officer shall every day make a visit to
the person under arrest and take the orders
of the Commandant on any request or representation made by the person under arrest.

(b) The request or representation made by the
person under arrest shall be entered in the
form set out in Appendix-III.

1[40A. (1) Not withstanding any thing contained in these
rules, the appointing authority may, at its discretion, place a
person serving under him, under suspension:-

(i) where a disciplinary action under the Act
against him is contemplated or is pending;
or

(ii) where in the opinion of the authority
aforesaid, he has engaged him self in
activities prejudicial to the interest or the
security of the state; or

(iii) where a case against him in respect of any
civil offence is under investigation, inquiry
or trial.

[PAGE 94]
BSF RULES 93

2[Provided that the Director General may exercise
the powers of suspension in respect of officers of the Force
upto the rank of Deputy Commandant.

2[Provided further that the Director General shall
report the facts of each case immediately to the Central
Government and all such orders of suspension shall become
ab-initio void unless confirmed by the Central Government
within a period of one month from the date of the said orders,
irrespective of the fact that the suspension is revoked by the
said authority within that period.

(2) A member of the Force shall be deemed to
have been placed under suspension by an order of the
appointing authority:-

(i) with effect from the date of his detention by civil police on a criminal charge or
otherwise for a period exceeding 48 hours; or

(ii) with effect from the date of his
conviction by a civil court on a criminal
charge, if the sentence awarded is
imprisonment for a term exceeding 48 hours.

(3) An order of suspension made or deemed to
have been made under this rule shall continue to remain in
force until it is modified or revoked by the authority
competent to do so.

(4) An order of suspension made or deemed to
have been made under this rule, may at any time, be modified
or revoked by the authority which made the order or by any
authority to which that authority is subordinate.

(5) When a person remains under suspension for
more than 90 days, a report giving reasons for delay in the
finalisation of his case shall be submitted to the Director
General by the Commandant of the accused and thereafter,
subsequent reports shall be submitted every month till the
case is finalised or the order of suspension is revoked
whichever is earlier.
1. Ins. by S.O. 187(E) dated 23.3.1984
2. Ins. by S.O. 544 dated 15.2.2002

[PAGE 95]
94 BSF RULES

CHAPTER-VI

CHOICE OF JURISDICTION BETWEEN SECURITY
FORCE COURT AND CRIMINAL COURT

41. Trial of cases either by security force court or
criminal court.- (1) Where an offence is triable both by a
criminal court and a Security Force Court, an officer referred
to in section 80 may-

(i) (a) Where the offence is committed by the accused in the course of the performance of his
duty as a member of the Force; or

(b) Where the offence is committed in relation
to property belonging to the Government or
the Force or a person subject to the Act; or

(c) Where the offence is committed against a
person subject to the Act, direct that any person subject to the Act, who is alleged to have
committed such an offence, be tried by a
Court, and

(ii) in any other case, decide whether or not it
would be necessary in the interests of
discipline to claim for trial by a Court any
person subject to the Act who is alleged to
have committed such an offence.

(2) In taking a decision to claim an offender for
trial by a Court, an officer referred to in section 80 may take
into account all or any of the following factors, namely:

(a) The offender is on active duty or has been
warned for active duty and it is felt that he is
trying to avoid such duty;

(b) the offender is a young person undergoing

[PAGE 96]
BSF RULES 95

training and the offence is not a serious one
and the trial of the offender by a criminal
court would materially affect his training.

(c) the offender can, in view of the nature of the
case, be dealt with summarily under the Act.

42. Cases not to be tried by Security Force Court.-
Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-rule (1) of rule
41, an offender may not be claimed for trial by a Security
Force Court:-

(a) where the offence is committed by him
alongwith any other person not subject to the
Act whose identity is known; or

(b) where the offence is committed by him while
on leave or during absence without leave.

[PAGE 97]
96 BSF RULES

CHAPTER - VII

INVESTIGATION AND SUMMARY
DISPOSAL

43. Offence report.- Where it is alleged that a person
subject to the Act 1[other than an officer or a Subordinate
Officer] has committed an offence punishable thereunder the
allegation shall be reduced to writing in the form set out in
Appendix IV.

2[44. Charge Sheet.- Where it is alleged that an officer or
a subordinate Officer has committed an offence punishable
under the Act, the allegation shall be reduced to writing in
the form set out in Appendix VI.

45. 2[Hearing of the charge against an enrolled
person.- (1) The charge shall be heard by the Commandant
of the Accused:-

(a) The charge and statements of witnesses if
recorded shall be read over to the accused. If
written statements of witnesses are not
available, he shall hear as many witnesses as
he may consider essential to enable him to
determine the issue;

(b) the accused shall be given an opportunity to
cross examine the witnesses and make a
statement in his defence.

(2) After hearing the charge under sub-rule (1),
the Commandant may:-

(i) award any of the punishments which he is
empowered to award; or
(ii) dismiss the charge; or
(iii) remand the accused, for preparing a record
of evidence or for preparation of an abstract
of evidence against him; or
1. Ins. by S.O. 436(E) dated 29.5.1990
2. Subs. by ibid.

[PAGE 98]
BSF RULES 97

(iv) remand him for trial by a Summary Security
Force Court:

Provided that, in cases where the Commandant
awards more than 7 days imprisonment or detention he shall
record the substance of evidence and the defence of the
accused:

Provided further that he shall dismiss the charge, if
in his opinion the charge is not proved or may dismiss it if
he considers that because of the previous character of the
accused and the nature of the charge against him it is not
advisable to proceed further with it:

Provided also that, in case of all offences punishable
with death a record of evidence shall be taken.

1[Provided further that in case of offences under
Sections 14, 15, 17, 18 and offence of ‘murder’ punishable
under Section 46 of the Act, if the accused has absconded or
deserted, the Commandant shall hear the charge in his
absence and remand the case for preparation of the record of
evidence.

2[45 A. Hearing of charge by an officer specified under
Section 53 of the Act.- (1) A specified officer may proceed
against an enrolled person if,-

(a) the charge can be summarily dealt with; or

(b) the case has not been reserved by the Commandant for disposal by himself; or

(c) the accused is not under arrest.

(2) After hearing the charge under sub-rule (1)
of the Rule 45 the specified officer may,-

(i) award any of the punishment which he is
empowered to award, or

1. Ins. by S.O. 436(E) dated 29.5.1990.
2. Inserted S.O. 55 (E), dated 01.02.1999.

[PAGE 99]
BSF RULES98

(ii) dismiss the charge, or

(iii) refer the case to Commandant.

1[45 B. Hearing of charge against an officer and a
subordinate officer.- (1) (a) The charge against an officer
or a subordinate officer shall be heard by his Commandant:

Provided that charge against a commandant, a Deputy
Inspector-General or an Inspector General may be heard
either by an officer commanding a Unit or Headquarters to
which the accused may be posted or attached or by his Deputy
Inspector-General, or his Inspector-General or, as the case
may be, the Director-General.

2[(b) The charge sheet and statement of witnesses,
if recorded and relevant documents, if any,
shall be read over to the accused if he has
not absconded or deserted.

Provided that where written statements of witnesses
are not available, the officer, hearing the charge shall hear as
many witnesses as he may consider essential to enable him
to know about the case.

(c) The accused 3[if he has not absconded or deserted] shall be given an opportunity to make
a statement in his defence.

(2) After hearing the charge under sub-rule (1),
the officer who heard the charge may :-

(i) dismiss the charge; or

(ii) remand the accused, for preparation of a
record of evidence or preparation of abstract
of evidence against the accused:
Provided that he shall dismiss the charge if in his
opinion the charge is not proved or may dismiss it if he
considers that because of the previous character of the

1. Subs Vide S.O. 436 (E) dated 29.05.1990
2. Ins. Vide S.O. 55 (E) dated 01.02.1999.
3. Ins. Vide S.O. 55 (E) dated 01.02.1999.

[PAGE 100]
BSF RULES 99

accused and the nature of the charge against him, it is not
advisable to proceed further with it:

Provided further that in case of all offences punishable
with death, a record of evidence shall be prepared.

1[Provided also that in case of offence under Section
14, 15, 17, 18 and offence of ‘murder’ punishable under
Section 46 of the Act, if the accused has absconded or
deserted, the Commandant shall hear the charge in his
absence and remand the case for preparation of record of
evidence.

46. Attachment to another unit.- The Commandant
shall not deal with any case:-

(i) where the offence with which the accused is
charged is against the Commandant himself; or

(ii) where the Commandant is himself a witness in
the case against the accused ; or

(iii) where the Commandant is otherwise personally
interested in the case, and the accused shall be
attached to another battalion or unit for disposal
of the case under the order of the Deputy
Inspector General:

Provided that a Commandant shall not be disqualified
from hearing a charge merely because the offence was
committed against the property of a Force Mess, band or
institution of which the Commandant is a member or trustee
or because the offence is one of disobedience of such
Commandant’s orders.

47. Charges not to be dealt with summarily.- A charge
for an offence under section 14 or section 15 or clauses (a)
and (b) of section 16 or section 17 or clause (a) of section 18
or clause (a) section 20 or clause (a) section 24 or section 46

1. Ins. vide S.O. 55 (E) dated 01.02.1999

[PAGE 101]
BSF RULES100

(other than that for simple hurt or theft) or a charge for abetment
of or an attempt to commit any of these offences shall not be
dealt with summarily.

48. Record of evidence.- (1) 1[The officer ordering the
record of evidence may either prepare the record of evidence
himself or detail another officer to do so.

(2) The witnesses shall give their evidence in the
presence of the accused and the accused shall have right to
cross-examine all witnesses who give evidence against him.

2[Provided that where statement of any witness at a
court of inquiry is available, examination of such a witness
may be dispensed with and the original copy of the said
statement may be taken on record. A copy thereof shall be
given to the accused and he shall have the right to crossexamine if he was not afforded an opportunity to crossexamine the witness at the Court of Inquiry.]

(3) After all the wintesses against the accused
have been examined, he shall be cautioned in the following
terms; “You may make a statement if you wish to do so, you
are not bound to make one and whatever you state shall be
taken down in writing and may be used in evidence.” After
having been cautioned in the aforesaid manner what ever
the accused states shall be taken down in writing.

(4) The accused may call witnesses in defence
and the officer recording the evidence may ask any question
that may be necessary to clarify the evidence given by such
witnesses.

(5) All witnesses shall give evidence on oath or
affirmation.

Provided that, no oath or affirmation shall be given
to the accused nor shall he be cross-examined.

1. Subs by S.O. 436(E), dated 29.5.1990
2. Ins. by ibid.

[PAGE 102]
BSF RULES 101

(6) (a) The statements given by witnesses shall ordinarily
be recorded in narrative form and the officer recording the
evidence may, at the request of the accused, permit any portion
of the evidence to be recorded in the form of question and answer.

(b) Witnesses shall sign their statements after the
same have been read over and explained to them.

1 [(6A) The provisions of section 89 of the Act shall apply
for procuring the attendance of the witnesses before the
officer preparing the Record of Evidence.]

(7) Where a witness cannot be compelled to
attend or is not available or his attendance cannot be procured
without an undue expenditure of time or money and after
the officer recording the evidence has given a certificate in
this behalf, a written statement signed by such witness may
be read to the accused and included in the record of evidence.
(8) After the recording of evidence is completed,
the officer recording the evidence shall give a certificate in
follwoing form:-
“Certified that the record of evidence ordered by
............................................ Commandant .........................was
made in the presence and hearing of the accused and the
provisions of rule 48 have been complied with”.

2[48 A. If a person subject to the Act absconds or deserts the
force after commission of offences under Sections 14, 15,
17, 18 and offence of ‘murder’ punishable under Section 46
of the Act and there is no immediate prospect of his
apprehension, the officer detailed to prepare the record of
evidence shall examine the witnesses in the absence of the
accused and such evidence may, on the apprehension of such
accused, be given in evidence against him at the trial by a
Security Force Court, if such witness is dead or incapable of
giving evidence or cannot be found or his presence cannot
be procured without an amount of delay, expenses or
inconvenience which, under the circumstances of the case
would be unreasonable.
49 Abstract of evidence.- (1) An abstract of evidence shall
1. Ins. by S.O. 329(E), dated 29.4.1981.
2. Ins. by S.O. 55(E), dated 01.02.1999

[PAGE 103]
BSF RULES102

be prepared either by 1[the officer ordering it] or an officer detailed
by him.

(2)(a) The abstract of evidence, shall include-
(i) signed statements of witnesses wherever
available or a precis thereof,
(ii) copies of all documents intended to be produced at the trial.
(b) Where signed statements of any witnesses are
not available a precis of their evidence shall
be included.

(3) A copy of the abstract of evidence shall be
given by the officer making the same to the accused and the
accused shall be given an opportunity to make a statement if
he so desires after he has been cautioned in the manner laid
down in sub-rule (3) of Rule 48:

Provided that the accused shall be given such time
as may be reasonable in the circumstances but in no case
less than twenty four hours after receiving the abstract of
evidence to make his statement.

50. Investigation of cases by Police.- Where the
Commandant considers it necessary so to do, he may lodge
a report with the police for investigation of any case.

51. Disposal of case 2[against an enrolled person] by
Commandant after record or abstract of evidence.-
(1)Where an officer has been detailed to prepare the record
of evidence or to make an abstract thereof, he shall forward
the same to the Commandant.

(2) The Commandant may, after going through
the record or abstract of evidence:

(i) Dismiss the charge, or
(ii) rehear the charge and award one of the
summary punishments, or

1. Sub. by S.O. 436 (E), dated 29-05-1990.
2. Ins. by ibid.

[PAGE 104]
BSF RULES 103

(iii) try the accused by a Summary Security Force
Court where he is empowered so to do, or

(iv) apply to a competent officer or authority to
convene a Court for the trial of the accused.

1[51A. Disposal of case against an officer or a subordinate
officer after preparation of record of evidence or abstract
of evidence.- (1) Where an officer has been detailed to
prepare the record of evidence or to make an abstract thereof,
he shall forward the same to the officer who ordered for its
preparation.

(2) The officer who ordered for the preparation
of record of evidence or abstract of evidence may, after going
through the record or abstract of evidence:-

(i) dismiss the charge; or

(ii) dispose of the case summarily if he is so empowered, or

(iii) refer the case to competent superior officer
for disposal, or

(iv) apply to a competent officer or authority to
convene a General Security Force Court for
the trial of the accused.

52. Application for a Court.- An application for a Court
shall be made by the Commandant in the form set out in
Appendix V to these rules and shall be accompanied by five
copies of the record or abstract of evidence and charge sheet
and such other documents as are mentioned in that application
form.

1. Ins. by S.O. 436(E), dated 29.5.1990

[PAGE 105]
BSF RULES104

CHAPTER - VIII

ON CHARGES AND MATTERS
ANTECEDENT TO TRIAL

53. Charge Sheet.- (1) A Charge Sheet shall contain the
whole of the issue or issues to be tried at one time and may
contain more than one charge, if the charges are founded on
the same facts or form part of a series of offences of same or
similar character;

Provided that a Charge under section 18, section 19,
section 29, and section 32 may be included in any charge
sheet, notwithstanding that other charges in that charge sheet
are not founded on the same facts or do not form part of a
series of offences of the same or similar character.

(2) Every charge sheet shall in its layout follow
the appropriate specimen set out in Appendix VI to these
rules.

54. Charges.- (1) There shall be a separate charge for
each offence.

(2)(a) If a single act or series of acts is of such a
nature that it is doubtful which of several offences the facts
which can be proved will constitute, the accused may be
charged with having committed all or any of such offences,
and any number of such charges may be tried at once or he
may be charged in the alternative with having committed
some one of the said offences.

(b) The charge for the more serious offence shall
precede the one for the less serious offence.

(3) Each charge shall consist of two parts,
namely:

(a) statement of offence; and

(b) particulars of the offence.

[PAGE 106]
BSF RULES 105

(4) The offence shall be stated, if not a civil
offence, as nearly as practicable, in the words of the Act,
and if a civil offence, in such words as would sufficiently
describe that offence.

(5)(a) The particulars shall state the time and place
of the alleged offence and the person (if any) against whom,
or the thing (if any) in respect of which, it was committed
and these should be sufficient to give the accused notice of
the matter with which he is charged.

(b) In case such particulars are not sufficient to
give the accused notice of the matter with which he is
charged, the charges shall also contain such particulars of
the manner in which the offence was committed as will be
sufficient for that purpose.

55. Joint charges.- (1) Any number of accused may be
charged jointly and tried together for an offence averred to
have been committed jointly by them.

(2) Any number of accused though not charged
jointly may also be tried together for an offence averred to
have been committed by one or more of them and abetted by
other or others.

(3) Where the accused are so charged under subrule (1) or sub-rule (2), any one or more of them may be
charged with, and tried for, any other offence with which
they could have been charged under sub-rule (1) of rule 53.

56. Validity of charge sheet.- A charge sheet shall not
be invalid merely by reason of the fact that it contains any
mistake in the name or description of the accused, and in the
construction of a charge sheet there shall be presumed in
favour of supporting it every proposition which may
reasonably be presumed to be impliedly included, though
not expressed there in, and the statement of the offence and
the particulars of the offence shall be read and construed
together.

[PAGE 107]
BSF RULES106

57. Amendment of the charge by the Security Force
Court.- (1) At any time during a trial, if it appears to the
court that there is in the charge sheet;

(a) a mistake in the name or description of the
accused; or

(b) a mistake which is attributable to a clerical
error or omission, the Court may amend the
charge-sheet so as to correct the mistake.

(2) If at any time during a trial, at which there is
a Law Officer, it appears to the Court, before it closes to
deliberate on its findings, that it is desirable in the interests
of justice to make any addition to, omission from or alteration
in, a charge which cannot be made under sub-rule (1) of this
rule it may, if such addition, omission, or alteration can be
made without unfairness to the accused, and with the
concurrence of the Law Officer, so amend the charge.

(3) If at any time during a trial, at which there is
no Law Officer, it appears to the Court, before it closes to
deliberate on its findings, that in the interests of justice it is
desirable to make any addition to omission from or alteration
in a charge which cannot be made under sub-rule (1) of this
rule, it may adjourn and report its opinion to the convening
officer, who may :-

(a) amend the charge if permissible under Rule
58 and direct the Court to try it as amended
after due notice of the amendment has been
given to the accused; or

(b) direct the Court to proceed with the trial of
the charge without amending it; or

(c) convene a fresh Court to try the accused.

58. Amendment of charge by Convening Officer.-
When a Security Force Court reports to the convening officer
under either Rule 57 or Rule 73 he may amend the charge in

[PAGE 108]
BSF RULES 107

respect of which the Court has reported to him by making
any addition to, omission from or alteration in the charge
which, in his opinion, is desirable in the interests of justice
and which he is satisfied can be made without unfairness to
the accused.

1[CONVENING OF GENERAL AND PETTY
SECURITY FORCE COURTS

59. Action by a Superior Authority on receiving an
application for convening a court.- (1) As soon as a superior
officer receives an application for convening a court, he shall
scrutinise the charge and the evidence against the accused,
where necessary in consultation with the Chief Law Officer
or a Law Officer and he:

(i) shall direct the Commandant to dismiss the
charge where the evidence against the accused is insufficient and further evidence is
not likely to be available and may direct him
to do so if he considers it inadvisable to proceed with the trial; or

(ii) may return the case to Commandant for being tried by a Summary Security Force Court
or being dealt with summarily if he considers that the same can be adequately so tried
or dealt with; or

(iii) may return the case for recording further evidence, if he considers the evidence recorded
insufficient but considers that further evidence may be available.

(2)(a) In any other case he may either himself
convene a Court or if he considers that a higher type of Court
should be convened and he is not empowered to convene
such a Court, forward the case to a higher authority with
recommendation that such Court may be convened.

1. Subs. by S.O. 329 (E), dated 29.4.1981.

[PAGE 109]
BSF RULES108

(b) The higher authority on receiving the case may
exercise any of the powers given in sub-rule (1) of this rule:

Provided that a superior officer or higher authority
before convening a General Security Force Court or a Petty
Security Force Court 1[***] shall take the advice of the Chief
Law Officer or a Law officer.

Provided further that the superior authority or higher
authority while convening a Court may reframe the charge
sheet on which the accused is to be tried.

60. 2[Disqualification of officers for serving on
General and Petty Security Courts.]- An officer shall be
disqualified from serving on a Court if he:-

(i) is an officer who convened the Court; or
(ii) is the prosecutor or a witness for the prosecution; or
(iii) has taken any part in the investigation of the
case, which would have necessitated his applying his mind to any part of the evidence,
or to the facts of the case; or
(iv) is the Commandant of the accused; or
(v) has a personal interest in the case.

61. 2[Composition of General and Petty Security
Force Courts.- (1) A court shall consist, as far as practicable,
of officers of different battalions 3[or units].

(2) The members of a court for the trial of an
officer shall be of a rank not lower than the rank of that officer,
unless in the opinion of the convening officer, officers of
such rank are not, having due regard to the exigencies of
public service, available. Such opinion shall be recorded in
the convening order.

(3) A court for the trial of a Commandant shall
as far as possible, consist of officers who are or have been
commandants or who hold, or have held, a higher
appointment.
1. Omitted by S.O. 329 (E) dated 29-04-1981.
2. Sub by ibid.
3. Ins. by S.O. 436 (E) dated 29-05-1990.

[PAGE 110]
BSF RULES 109

62. Duties of convening officers when convening
courts.- When an officer convenes a Court he shall;

(a) issue a convening order in the appropriate
form set out in Appendix VII;

(b) direct upon what charges the accused is to be
tried and ensure that the accused has been
remanded for trial by a Court upon these
charges, by his Commandant;

(c) if he is of the opinion that charges shall be
put in separate charge sheets, so direct and
shall also direct the order in which they are
to be tried;

(d) direct, if there is more than one accused
whether the accused are to be tried jointly or
separately;

(e) appoint members of the Court and any waiting members;

(f) if convening:-

(i) a General Security Force Court; or

(ii) a Petty Security Force Court which he
considers should be attended by a law
officer, take the necessary steps to
procure the appointment of Law Officer
by or on behalf of the Chief Law Officer;

(g) appoint an officer, subject to the Act or a
counsel assisted by such an officer to
prosecute or detail a Commandant to appoint
an officer subject to the Act, to prosecute:

Provided that the convening officer may appoint more
than one such officer to prosecute if he thinks fit;

(h) appoint an interpreter wherever necessary;

[PAGE 111]
BSF RULES110

(i) send to the senior member the charge sheet,
the convening order and a copy of the record
or abstract of evidence from which any
evidence which in his opinion would be
inadmissible at the trial has been expurgated;

(j) forward to each member of the Court and to
each waiting member a copy of the charge
sheet;

(k) forward to the prosecutor copies of the charge
sheet and convening order and the original
record or abstract of evidence together with
an unexpurgated copy there of showing the
passages (if any) which have been expurgated
in the copy sent to the senior member;

(l) forward to the Law Officer (if any) copies of
the charge sheet and convening order and an
unexpurgated copy of the record or abstract
of evidence showing the passages (if any)
which have been expurgated in the copy sent
to the senior member;

(m) ensure that the Commandant has summoned
all the prosecution witnesses and such
defence witnesses as the accused may have
requested to be summoned under rule 64.

63. Preparation of defence by the accused.- (1) An
accused, who has been remanded for trial, shall be afforded
proper opportunity for preparing his defence and shall be
allowed proper communication with his defending officer
or counsel and with his witnesses.

(2) A defending officer shall be appointed to
defend an accused who has been remanded for trial unless
the accused states in writing that he does not wish such an
appointment to be made.

[PAGE 112]
BSF RULES 111

(3) if the prosecution is to be undertaken by a
legally qualified officer or by a counsel the accused shall be
notified of this fact in sufficient time to enable him, if he so
desires to make arrangement for a legally qualified officer
or counsel to defend him.

(4) As soon as practicable after a decision has
been taken to place the accused on trial and in any case not
less than four days before his trial he shall be given:

(a) a copy of the charge-sheet;

(b) an unexpurgated copy of the record or abstract
of evidence showing the passages (if any),
which have been expurgated in the copy sent
to the senior member;

(c) notice of any additional evidence which the
prosecution intends to adduce; and

(d) if the accused so requires, a list of the ranks
names and units of the members who are to
form the Court and of any waiting members.

(5) when an accused is given a copy of the
charge-sheet and of the record or abstract of evidence in accordance with this rule, he shall:

(a) have the charge explained to him; and

(b) be informed that, upon his making a written
request to his Commandant not less than
twenty four hours before his trial requiring
the attendance at his trial of a witness (other
than a witness for the prosecution) whom he
desires to call in his defence (such witness
to be named by him), reasonable steps will
be taken in accordance with these rules to
procure the attendance of any such witness
at his trial.

[PAGE 113]
BSF RULES112

(6) The provisions of sub-rules (2) and (3) shall
not apply in relation to a trial before a Summary Security
Force Court and in relation to such a trial the period of four
days referred to in sub-rule (4) shall be construed as twenty
four hours.

SUMMONING OF DEFENCE WITNESSES

64. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-rules (2) and
(3) the Commandant shall, on a request made in this behalf
by the accused, summon such witnesses as are specified by
the accused.

(2) Where the Commandant is satisfied that the
evidence to be given by any witness is not likely to be of
material assistance at the trial he may refuse to summon such
witness.

(3) The Commandant may before summoning
any witness, require the accused to defray or undertake to
defray the cost of attendance of such witness and if the
accused refuses to defray or undertake to defray the cost
aforesaid, the Commandant may refuse to procure the
attendance of that witness.

(4) Where the Commandant has refused to
summon the witness under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (3), the
accused may make an application to the Court for the
summoning of such witness and the Court may, if it considers
it to be expendient in the interests of justice, order the
summoning of such witness and, if necessary, adjourn the
proceeding for the attendance of such witness.

[PAGE 114]
BSF RULES 113

CHAPTER-IX

PROCEDURE FOR SECURITY FORCE
COURTS

65. Assembly and Swearing of Court : (1) Upon a
Security Force Court assembling the Court shall, before
beginning the trial, satisfy itself in closed court:-

(a) that the Court has been convened in
accordance with the Act and these rules;
(b) that the Court consists of not less than the
minimum number of officers required by law;
(c) that the members are of the required rank;
(d) that members have been duly appointed and
are not disqualified under the Act;
(e) that if there is Law Officer he has been duly
appointed;
(f) that the accused appears from the charge
sheet, to be subject to the Act and to be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Court; and
(g) that each charge is correct in law and framed
in accordance with these rules;
(2)(a) Where a vacancy occurs through a member
of the court being disqualified under the Act
or being absent when the Court assembles,
the presiding officer may appoint a duly
qualified waiting member to fill that vacancy.

(b) The Presiding Officer may if the interests of
justice so require, substitute a duly qualified
waiting member for a member appointed by
the convening officer.

(3) If the Court is not satisfied on any of the
matters mentioned in sub-rule (1) and is not competent to
rectify such matters itself under the Act or these rules, it
shall before commencing the trial, report thereon to the
convening officer.

[PAGE 115]
BSF RULES114

(4) When the Court has complied with this rule and is
ready to proceed with the trial, the presiding officer shall
open the Court and the trial shall begin.

66. Commencement of Trial : (1) The order convening
the Court and the names of the officers appointed to try the
accused shall be read in the hearing of the accused who shall
be given an opportunity to object to any of those officers in
accordance with section 84 of the Act.

(2) When a Court is to try more than one accused whether
separately or jointly, each accused shall be given an
opportunity to object to any officer on the Court in accordance
with the foregoing sub-rule and shall be asked separately
whether he has any such objection.

(3) An accused shall state the names of all the officers
to whom he objects before any objection is disposed of.

(4) If more than one officer is objected to; the objection
to each officer shall be disposed of separately and the
objection to the lowest in rank shall be disposed of first.

(5) An accused may make a statement and call any person
to make a statement in support of his objection.

(6) An officer to whom the accused has objected may
state in open Court anything relevant to the objection of the
accused whether in support or in rebuttal thereof.

(7) An objection to an officer shall be considered in
closed Court by all the other officers on the Court and the
officer objected to shall not be present at that time.

(8) When an objection to an officer is allowed under subsection(3) of section 84 that officer shall forthwith retire and
take no further part in the proceedings.

(9) When an officer objected to retire and there is duly
qualified waiting member in attendance, the presiding officer
shall immediately appoint him to take the place of the officer
who has retired.

[PAGE 116]
BSF RULES 115

(10) The Court shall satisfy itself that a waiting member
who takes that place of a member of the Court is of the
required rank and not disqualified under the Act and shall
give the accused an opportunity to object to him and shall
deal with any such objection in accordance with the Act and
these rules.

(11) If as the result of the allowance of an objection to a
member there are insufficient officers available to form a
Court in compliance with the Act the Court shall report to
the convening officer without proceeding further with the
trial and convening officer may either appoint an officer as a
member to fill the vacancy or convene a fresh Court to try
the accused.

67. Swearing or Affirming of Members: As soon as
the Court is constituted with the proper number of
officers who are not objected to or objections in respect
of whom have been overruled, an oath or affirmation
shall be administered to every member in presence of
the accused in one of the following forms or in such other
form to the same purport as the Court ascertains to be
according to his religion or otherwise binding on his
conscience.

FORM OF OATH

“I, ................................... swear by Almighty God,
that I will, well and truly, try the accused ( or accused
persons), before the Court, according to the evidence and
that I will, duly administer justice, according to the Border
Security Force Act, 1968, without partiality, favour or
affection; and I do further swear that I will not, on any
account, at any time, whatsoever, disclose or discover, the
vote or opinion of any particular member of the Court unless
required to give evidence there-of by a court of law”.

[PAGE 117]
BSF RULES116

FORM OF AFFIRMATION
“I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . do solemnly, sincerely and truly,
declare and affirm, that I will well and truly, try the accused
(or accused persons), before the court, according to the
evidence, and that I will, duly administer justice according
to the Border Security Force Act, 1968, without partiality,
favour or affection; and I do further solemnly, sincerely and
truly declare and affirm that I will not, on any account at any
time whatsoever, disclose or discover, the vote or opinion of
any particular member of this Court unless required to give
evidence there-of by a Court of Law”.

68. Swearing or Affirmation of Law Officer and other
officers: After the members of the Court are all sworn or
have made affirmation, an oath or affirmation shall be
administered to the following persons or such of them as are
present at the Court in such of the following forms as shall
be appropriate, or in such other form to the same purport as
the Court ascertains to be according to the religion or
otherwise binding on the conscience of the person to be sworn
or affirmed.

(A) LAW OFFICER

FORM OF OATH

“I, . . . . . . . . . . . . swear by Almighty God that I will,
to the best of my ability, carry out the duties of Law Officer,
in accordance with the Border Security Force Act, 1968
and the rules made there-under without partiality, favour or
affection, and I do further swear that I will not, on any account
at any time whatsoever, disclose or discover the vote or
opinion on any matter of any particular member of this Court,
unless required to give evidence thereof by a court of law”.

[PAGE 118]
BSF RULES 117

FORM OF AFFIRMATION

“I . . . . . . . . do hereby, solemnly, sincerely and truly
declare and affirm that I will, to the best of my ability, carry
out the duties of Law Officer in accordance with the Border
Security Force Act, 1968 and the rules made thereunder
without partiality, favour or affection, and I do further
solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm, that I will
not, on any account, at any time, whatsoever, disclose or
discover the vote or opinion, on any matter of any particular
member of this Court, unless required to give evidence thereof by a court of law”.

(B) OFFICER ATTENDING FOR THE PURPOSE OF
INSTRUCTION:

FORM OF OATH

“I, . . . . . . . . . . . . . swear by Almighty God that I will
not on any account; at any time whatsoever disclose or discover
the vote or opinion of any particular member of this Court
unless required to give evidence thereof by a court of law”.

FORM OF AFFIRMATION

“I, . .. . .. . . . . . . do solemnly, sincerely and truly,
declare and affirm that I will not on any account, at any time
whatsoever, disclose or discover the vote or opinion of any
particular, member of this Court unless required to give
evidence thereof by a court of law”.

(C) SHORTHAND WRITER:

FORM OF OATH

“I, . . . . . . . . . swear by Almighty God that I will
truly take down to the best of my power, the evidence to be
given before this Court and such other matters as I may be
required to take down and will, when required, deliver to the
Court a true transcript of the same”.

[PAGE 119]
BSF RULES118

FORM OF AFFIRMATION
“I, . . . . . . . . . . do solemnly, sincerely and truly, declare
and affirm that I will truly take down to the best of my power the
evidence to be given before this Court and such other matters as
I may be required to take down and will, when required, deliver
to the court a true transcript of the same”.

(D) INTERPRETER:

FORM OF OATH

“I, . . . . . . . . . swear by Almighty God that I will
faithfully, interpret and translate, as I shall be required to do,
touching the matter before this Court”.

FORM OF AFFIRMATION

“I, . . . . . . . . . . do solemnly, sincerely and truly
declare and affirm that I will faithfully interpret and translate,
as I shall be required to do, touching the matter before this
Court”.

69. Objection to Interpreter or Shorthand Writer.-
A person shall not be sworn or affirmed as an interpreter or
shorthand writer, if he is objected to by the accused unless
the court after hearing the accused and the prosecutor,
disallows such objection as being unreasonable.

70. Objection to Law Officer and Prosecutor.- The
accused shall not be permitted to object to the Law Officer
or the prosecutor.

71. Arraignment.- (1) When the Court and the Law
Officer (if any) have been sworn, the charge shall be read to
the accused and shall be asked whether he pleads guilty or
not guilty to the charge or charges.

(2) If there is more than one charge against the accused he

[PAGE 120]
BSF RULES 119

shall be required to plead separately to each charge.

(3) If there is more than one charge-sheet, against the
accused, before the Court, the Court shall proceed with the
charges in the first of such charge-sheets and shall announce
its finding thereon and if the accused has pleaded guilty
comply with rule 78 before it arraigns him upon the charges
in any subsequent charge-sheet.

72. Plea to Jurisdiction.- (1) The accused, before
pleading to the charge, may offer a plea regarding the
jurisdiction of the Court; and in such a case-

(a) the accused may adduce evidence in support
of the plea and the prosecutor may adduce
evidence in answer thereto ; and

(b) The prosecutor may address the Court in answer to the plea and the accused may reply
to the prosecutor’s address.

(2) If the Court allows the plea it shall adjourn
and report to the convening officer.

(3) When the Court reports to the convening
officer under this rule, the convening officer shall :-

(a) if he approves the decision of the Court to
allow the plea, dissolve the Court;

(b) if he disapproves the decision of the court;
either:

(i) refer the matter back to the Court and
direct them to proceed with the trial ;
or
(ii) convene a fresh Court to try the
accused.

73. Objection to the charge.- (1) An accused before

[PAGE 121]
BSF RULES120

pleading to a charge may object to it on the grounds that it is not
correct in law or is not framed in accordance with these rules
and if he does so, the prosecutor may address the Court in
answer to the objection and the accused may reply to the
prosecutor’s address.

(2) If the Court upholds the objection, it shall either
amend the charge if permissible under rule 57 or adjourn
and report to the convening officer:

Provided that if there is another charge or another
charge sheet before the Court the Court may, before
adjourning under this rule, proceed with the trial of such
other charge or other charge-sheet.

(3) When the Court reports to the convening officer under
this rule, the convening officer shall:-

(a) if he approves the decision of the Court to
allow the objection:-

(i) dissolve the Court; or

(ii) where there is another charge or
another charge sheet before the Court to which
the objection does not relate and which the
Court has not tried direct the Court to proceed
with the trial of such other charge or chargesheet only; or

(iii) amend the charge to which the
objection relates if permissible under rule 58
and direct the Court to try it as amended;

(b) If he disapproves the decision of the Court to
allow the objection:-

(i) direct the Court to try the charge, or

(ii) where there is another charge or
another charge-sheet before the Court to
which the objection does not relate and which

[PAGE 122]
BSF RULES 121

the Court has not tried, direct the Court to
proceed with the trial, of such other charge or
charge sheet only, or

(iii) convene a fresh Court to try the accused.

74. Plea in bar of trial.- (1) An accused before pleading
to a charge may offer a plea that the trial is barred under
section 75 or section 76. If he does so:-

(a) the accused may adduce evidence in support
of the plea and the prosecutor may adduce
evidence in answer there-to, and

(b) the prosecutor may address the Court in answer to the plea and the accused may reply
to the prosecutor’s address.

(2) If the Court allows the plea it shall adjourn
and report to the convening officer :

Provided that if there is another charge or another
charge-sheet before the Court, the Court may, before
adjourning under this rule, proceed with the trial of such
other charge or other charge-sheet.

(3) When a Court reports to the convening officer
under this rule, the convening officer shall:-

(a) if he approves the decision of the Court to
allow the plea,

(i) dissolve the Court; or

(ii) where there is another charge or
another charge-sheet before the Court
to which the plea does not (relate and
which the Court has) not tried, direct
the Court to proceed with the trial of
such other charge or charge-sheet
only,

[PAGE 123]
BSF RULES122

(b) if he disapproves the decision of the Court to
allow the plea:-

(i) direct the Court to try the charge; or

(ii) where there is another charge or
another charge-sheet before the Court
to which the plea does not relate and
which the Court has not tried, direct
the Court to proceed with the trial of
such other charge or charge-sheet
only; or
(iii) convene a fresh Court to try the
accused.

75. Application for separate trial.- (1) Where two or
more accused are charged jointly, any one of the accused
may, before pleading to the charge, apply to the Court to be
tried separately on the ground that he would be prejudiced
in his defence if he were not tried separately.

(2) Where the accused makes such an
application, the prosecutor may address the Court in answer
thereto and the accused may reply to the prosecutor’s address.

(3) Where the Court is of the opinion that the
interest of justice so require it shall allow the application
and try separately the accused who made it.

76. Application for trial on separate charge-sheet.-
(1) Where a charge-sheet contains more than one charge, the
accused may, before pleading to the charges, apply to the
court to be tried separately on any charge in that chargesheet on the ground that he would be prejudiced in his defence
if he were not tried separately on that charge.

(2) Where the accused makes such an
application, the prosecutor may address the Court in the
answer thereto and the accused may reply to the prosecutor’s
address.

[PAGE 124]
BSF RULES 123

(3) Where the Court is of the opinion that interests
of justice so require it shall allow the application and try the
accused separately on the charge to which it relates as if that
charge had been inserted in a separate charge-sheet.

77. Pleading to the charge.- (1) After any plea under
rules 72 and 74 and any objection under rule 73 and any
applications under rules 75 and 76 have been dealt with, the
accused shall be required subject to sub-rule. (2) to plead
either guilty or not guilty to each charge on which he is
arraigned.

(2) Where a Court is empowered by section 93 to find
an accused guilty of an offence other than that charged or
guilty of committing the offence in circumstances involving
a less degree of punishment or where it could after hearing
the evidence, make a special finding of guilty subject to
exceptions or variations in accordance with rule 99 the
accused may plead guilty to such other offence or to the
offence charged as having been committed in circumstances
involving a less degree of punishment or to the offence
charged subject to such exceptions or variations.

78. Acceptance of Plea of guilty.- (1) Where an accused
pleads guilty to a charge under either sub-rule (1) or subrule (2) of rule 77, the presiding officer or Law Officer shall,
before the Court decides to accept the plea, explain to the
accused the nature of the charge and the general effect of his
plea and in particular the difference in procedure when an
accused pleads guilty and when an accused pleads not guilty.

(2) A Court shall not accept a plea of guilty under either
sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) of rule 77, if:-

(a) the court is not satisfied that the accused
understands the nature of the charge or the
effect of his plea; or

(b) the presiding officer having regard to all the
circumstances, considers that the accused
should plead not guilty; or

[PAGE 125]
BSF RULES124

(c) the accused is liable, if convicted, to be sentenced
to death;

(3)(a) In the case of a plea of guilty under rule 79, a
Court shall not accept the plea unless the
convening officer concurs and it is satisfied
of the justice of such course.

(b) The concurrence of the convening officer may
be signified by the prosecutor.

(4) When a plea of guilty under either sub-rule
(1) or sub-rule (2) of rule 77 is not accepted by the Court or
the accused either refuses to plead to the charge or does not
plead to it intelligibly, the Court shall record a plea of not
guilty.

(5) When a Court is satisfied that it can properly
accept a plea of guilty under either sub-rule (1) or sub-rule
(2) of rule 77, it shall record a finding of guilty in respect
thereof.

79. Plea on alternative charge.- (1) When an accused
pleads guilty to the first of two or more alternative charges,
the Court, if it accepts the plea of guilty, shall record a finding
of guilty in respect of the first charge and the prosecutor
shall withdraw any alternative charge before the accused is
arraigned on it.

(2) When an accused pleads guilty to one of two
or more charges which are laid in the alternative other than
the first of such charges, the Court may:-

(a) proceed as if the accused had pleaded not
guilty to all the charges; or

(b) (i) With concurrence of the convening
officer (which may be signified by the prosecutor)
record a finding of guilty on the charge to which
the accused has pleaded guilty and a finding of
not guilty on any alternative charge which is
placed before it in the charge-sheet.

[PAGE 126]
BSF RULES 125

(ii) Where the Court records such finding the
prosecutor shall before the accused is
arraigned on it withdraw any charge which is
alternative to the charge of which the Court
has found the accused guilty and which is
placed after it in the charge-sheet.

80. Order of trial where plea of guilty and not guilty.-
(1) After the Court has recorded a finding of guilty, if
there is no other charge in the same charge-sheet to which
the accused has pleaded not guilty and no other accused who
has pleaded not guilty to a charge in that charge-sheet, it
shall proceed with the trial as directed by rule 81.

(2) Where there is another charge in the charge-sheet to
which the accused has pleaded not guilty (or there is another
accused who has pleaded not guilty) to a charge in that charge
sheet, the Court shall not comply with rule 81 until after it has
dealt with such other charge or tried such other accused and has
announced and recorded its finding in respect thereof.

81. Procedure on plea of guilty.- (1) When the Court
has recorded a finding of guilty in respect of charge to which
an accused had pleaded guilty the prosecutor shall read the
record or abstract of evidence to the Court or inform the
Court of the facts contained therein:

Provided that if an expurgated copy of the record or
abstract of evidence was sent to the presiding officer, the
prosecutor shall not read to the Court those parts of the record
or abstract of evidence which have been expurgated or inform
the Court of the facts contained in those parts, and shall not
hand the original record or abstract of evidence to the Court
until the trial is concluded.

(2) 1 (* * *).

(3) After 2 (sub-rule (1) has been complied with,
the accused may:-

1. Omitted by S.O. 436(E), dated 29.5.1990.
2. Subs by ibid.

[PAGE 127]
BSF RULES126

(a) adduce evidence of character and in mitigation
of punishment;

(b) address the Court in mitigation of
punishment;

(4) After sub-rule (3) has complied with, the court
shall proceed as directed in rule 101.

82. Change of plea.- (1) An accused who has pleaded
not guilty may at any time before the Court closes to
deliberate on its finding withdraw his plea of not guilty
and substitute a plea of guilty (including a plea of guilty
under rule 79) and in such a case the Court shall, if it is
satisfied that it can accept the accused’s changed plea under
these rules, record a finding in accordance with the
accused’s changed plea and so for as is necessary proceed
as directed by rule 81.

(2) Where at any time during the trial it appears
to the court that an accused who has pleaded guilty does not
understand the effect of his plea or the nature of the charge
the Court shall enter a plea of not guilty and proceed with
the trial accordingly.

(3) When the Court records a plea of not guilty
in respect of any charge under sub-rule (2) it shall, if there
was a charge laid in the alternative thereto to which the
prosecutor withdrew under rule 79, reinstate such alternative
charge, arraign the accused thereon and proceed with the
trial as if it had never been withdrawn.

83. Procedure on pleas of not guilty.- After a plea of
not guilty to any charge has been recorded:-

(i) the Court shall ask the accused whether he
wishes to apply for an adjournment on the
ground that any of these rules relating to
procedure before trial have not been complied
with and that he has been prejudiced thereby

[PAGE 128]
BSF RULES 127

or on the ground that he has not had sufficient
opportunity for preparing his defence;

(ii) where the accused applies for an
adjournment;

(a) the accused may adduce evidence in support
of his application and the prosecutor may
adduce evidence in answer thereto; and

(b) the prosecutor may address the Court in
answer to the application and the accused
may reply to the prosecutor’s address.

(iii) the Court may grant an adjournment if it
thinks the interests of justice so require.

84. Opening Address.- (1) The prosecutor may, if he so
desires, and shall, if required by the Court, make an opening
address explaining the charge and the nature and general
effect of the evidence which he proposes to adduce.

(2) The witnesses for the prosecution shall then be called
and give their evidence.

85. Additional Witness.- Where the prosecutor intends
to adduce evidence which is not contained in any record or
abstract of evidence given to the accused notice of such
intention together with the particulars of the evidence shall,
when practicable, be given to the accused a reasonable time
before the evidence is adduced. If such evidence is adduced
without such notice or particulars having been given, the
Court may, if the accused so desires either adjourn after
receiving the evidence or allow any cross-examination arising
out of that evidence to be postponed, and the Court shall
inform the accused of his right to apply for such an
adjournment or postponement.

86. Dropping Witnesses.- The prosecutor shall not be
bound to call all the witnesses against the accused whose
evidence is contained in the record or abstract of evidence,
nor a witness when he has notified the accused that he intends

[PAGE 129]
BSF RULES128

to call under rule 85, but if the prosecutor does not intend to call
such witness to give evidence, he shall either tender him for crossexamination by the accused, or give the accused reasonable notice
that he does not intend to call the witness and that the accused
will be allowed to communicate with him and to call him as a
witness for the defence, if he so desires and if the witness is
available.

87. Withdrawal of Witnesses.- During a trial a witness
other than the prosecutor or accused shall not, except by leave
of the Court, be in court while not under examination, and if
while he is under examination a discussion arises as to whether
a question is to be allowed or not with regard to his evidence
the Court may direct the witness to withdraw during such
discussion.

88. Examination of Witnesses.- (1) A witness may be
examined by the person calling him and may be cross examined
by the opposite party to the proceedings and on the conclusion
of any such cross-examination may be re-examined by the person
who called him on matters arising out of the cross-examination.

(2)(a) The person examining a witness shall put his
questions to the witness orally and unless an
objection is made by the witness, the Court, the
Law Officer, the prosecutor or by the accused,
the witness shall reply forthwith.

(b) Where such an objection is made, the witness
shall not reply until the objection has been
disposed of.

(3) The Court may allow the cross-examination or reexamination of a witness to be postponed.

(4) Before the examination of a witness, he shall be
administered an oath or affirmation in the following form or in
such other form to the same purport as the court ascertains to be
in accordance with his religion or otherwise binding on his
conscience.

[PAGE 130]
BSF RULES 129

FORM OF OATH
“I, . . . . . . . . . . . . . swear by Almighty God that whatever
I shall state, shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
truth”.

FORM OF AFFIRMATION

“I, . . . . . . . . do solemnly, truly and sincerely declare
and affirm that whatever I shall state, shall be the truth the
whole truth and nothing but the truth.”

89. Questioning by the Court.-

(1) The presiding officer, the Law Officer and
any member of the Court may put questions to a witness.

(2) Upon any such question being answered, the
prosecutor and the accused may put to the witness such
questions arising from the answer which he has given as
seem proper to the Court.

90. Reading over of evidence

(1)(a) The record which has been made of the
evidence given by a witness shall be read
back to him before he leaves the Court and
when this is done he may ask for the record
to be corrected or explain the evidence which
he has given.

(b) Where any such correction is made or
explanation given, the prosecutor and the
accused may put such questions to the witness
respecting the correction or explanation as
seem proper to the Court.

(2) When a short hand writer is employed it shall
not be necessary to comply with sub-rule (1), if in the opinion
of the Court and the Law Officer (if any) it is unnecessary to
do so.

[PAGE 131]
BSF RULES130

Provided that if any witness so demands, sub-rule (1)
shall be complied with.

91. Calling or recalling witnesses by the Court.- (1)(a)
The Court may at any time before it closes to deliberate on
its finding or if there is a Law Officer before he begins to
sum up, call a witness or recall a witness, if in the opinion
of the Court it is in the interest of justice to do so.

(b) Where the Court calls a witness or recalls a witness
under this rule, the prosecutor and the accused may put such
questions to the witness as seem proper to the Court.

(2) The prosecutor and the accused may, at any time
before the Court closes to deliberate on its finding or if there
is a Law Officer before he begins to sum up, recall a witness
by leave of the Court and the prosecutor and the accused
may put such questions to the witness as seem proper to the
Court (R-95).

92. Submission of no case to answer and stopping of
cases.-

(1)(a) At the close of the case for the prosecution
the accused may submit to the Court in
respect of any charge that the prosecution has
failed to establish a prima-facie case for him
to answer and that he should not be called
upon to make his defence to that charge.

(b) Where the accused makes such submission
the prosecutor may address the Court in
answer thereto and the accused may reply to
the prosecutor’s address.

(2) The Court shall not allow the submission unless
it is satisfied that:-

(a) the prosecution has not established a prima facie case
on the charge as laid; and

[PAGE 132]
BSF RULES 131

(b) it is not open to it on the evidence to make a
special finding under either section 93 or subrule (4) of Rule 99.

(3) (a) Where the Court allows the submission, it,
shall find the accused not guilty of the charge
to which it relates and subject to confirmation
the finding shall forthwith be announced in
open Court.

(b) Where the Court disallows the submission it
shall proceed with the trial of the offence as
charged.

(4) The Court may, of its own motion, after the
close of the hearing of the case for the prosecution, and after
hearing the prosecutor find the accused not guilty of the
charge and subject to confirmation the finding shall forthwith
be announced in open Court.

93. Case for the defence.- (1) After the close of the case
for the prosecution, the presiding officer or the Law Officer
(if any) shall explain to the accused that:-

(a) if he wishes, he may give evidence on oath
as a witness or make a statement without
being sworn but that he is not obliged to do
either.

(b) if he gives evidence on oath, he shall be liable
to be cross examined by the prosecutor and
to be questioned by the Court.

(2) For the purpose of enabling the accused to
explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against
him, the Court may, at any stage of the trial, without
previously warning the accused, put such questions to him
as the Court considers necessary, and shall for the purpose
aforesaid, question him generally on the case after the
witnesses for the prosecution have been examined and before
he is called on for his defence.

[PAGE 133]
BSF RULES132

(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to
punishments by refusing to answer such questions, or by giving
false answers to them but the Court may draw such inference
from such refusal or answers as it thinks just.

(4) The answers given by the accused may be
taken into consideration in such trial and put, in evidence
for or against him in any other inquiry into, or trial for, any
other offence which such answers may tend to show he has
committed.

(5) If the accused intends to call a witness to the
facts of the case other than himself, he may make an opening
address outlining the case for the defence before the evidence
for the defence is given.

94. Witnesses for defence.- (1) After rule 93 has been
complied with the witnesses for the defence (if any) shall be
called to give their evidence.

(2) The provisions of rules 88, 89 and 90 shall
apply to the witnesses for the defence as they apply to the
evidence of witnesses for the prosecution.

95. Witnesses in reply.- After the witnesses for the
defence have given their evidence the prosecutor may be by
leave of the Court call a witness or recall a witness to give
evidence on any matter raised by the accused in his defence
which the prosecution could not properly have mentioned to
the Court before the accused disclosed his defence or which
the prosecution could not reasonably have foreseen. (R-91)

96. Closing addresses.- (1) After all the evidence has
been given, the prosecutor and the accused may each make
a closing address to the Court.

(2) The accused shall be entitled to make his
closing address after the closing address by the prosecutor
unless the accused has called a witness to facts other than
himself, in which case the prosecutor shall be entitled, subject

[PAGE 134]
BSF RULES 133

to sub-rules (3) and (4) to make his closing address after the
accused has made the closing address.

(3) Where two or more accused are tried jointly
any one of them who has called no such witness shall be
entitled to make his closing address after the prosecutor has
made the closing address.

(4)(a) Where two or more accused are represented
by same defending officer or counsel he may
make one closing address only.

(b) Where any one of the accused for whom he
appears has called no witness to facts other
than himself such defending officer or counsel
shall be entitled to make his closing address
after the prosecutor has made the closing
address.

97. Summing up by Law Officer.- After the closing
address, if there is a Law Officer he shall sum up the evidence
and advise the Court on the law relating to the case in open
court.

98. Deliberation on finding.- (1) The Court shall
deliberate on its finding in closed Court in the presence of
Law Officer.

(2) The opinion of each member of the Court as
to the finding shall be given by word of mouth on each charge
separately starting with the junior most in rank.

99. Record and announcement of Finding.- 1(1) The
finding on every charge upon which the accused is arraigned
shall be recorded and, except as provided in these rules, shall
be recorded as finding of ‘Guilty’ or of ‘Not Guilty’. After
recording the finding on each charge, the Court shall give
brief reasons in support thereof. The Law Officer or, if there
is none, the Presiding Officer shall record or cause to be
recorded such brief reasons in the proceedings. The above

1. Subs- S.O. 2032 dated 09.07.2003

[PAGE 135]
BSF RULES134

record shall be signed and dated by the Presiding Officer and the
Law Officer, if any.

(2) Where the Court is of opinion as regards any
charge that the facts proved do not disclose the offence charge
or any offence of which he might under the Act legally be
found guilty on the charge as laid, the Court shall acquit the
accused of that charge.

(3) If the Court has doubts as regards any charge
whether the facts proved show the accused to be guilty on
the charge as laid, it may, before recording a finding on that
charge, refer to the confirming authority for an opinion,
setting out the facts which it finds to be proved and may if
necessary adjourn for that purpose.

(4) Where the Court is of opinion as regards any
charge that the facts which it finds to be proved in evidence
differ materially from the facts alleged in the statement of
particulars in the charge but are nevertheless sufficient to
prove the offence stated in the charge, and that the difference
is not so material as to have prejudiced the accused in his
defence, it may, instead of a finding of ‘Not Guilty’ record a
special finding.

(5) The special finding may find the accused
guilty on a charge subject to the statement of exceptions or
variations specified therein.

(6) Where there are alternative charges, and the
facts proved appear to the Court not to constitute the offence
mentioned in any of those alternative charges, the Court shall
record a finding of “Not Guilty” on that charge.

(7) The Court shall not find the accused guilty
on more than one of two or more charges laid in the
alternative, even if conviction upon one charge necessarily
connotes guilty upon the alternative charge or charges.

(8) If the Court thinks that the facts proved
constitute one of the offences stated in two or more of the
alternative charges, but doubts which of those offences the

[PAGE 136]
BSF RULES 135

facts do at law constitute, it may, before recording a finding on
those charges, refer to the confirming authority for an opinion,
setting out the facts which it finds to be proved and stating that it
doubts whether those facts constitute in law the offence stated in
such one or other of the charges and may, if necessary, adjourn
for that purpose.

(9) The finding on each charge shall be
announced forthwith in open Court as subject to
confirmation.

100. Procedure on Acquittal.- If the finding on all the
charges is ‘Not Guilty’ the presiding officer shall affix his
signature and date on the finding and such signature shall
authenticate the whole of the proceedings, and the
proceedings upon being signed by the Law Officer (if any)
shall be at once transmitted for confirmation.

101. Procedure on Conviction.- (1) If the finding on any
charge is ‘guilty’, then, for the guidance of the Court in
determining its sentence, and of the confirming authority in
considering the sentence, the Court, before deliberating on
the sentence, shall, whenever possible, take evidence of and
record the general character, age, service, rank, any
recognised acts of gallantry or distinguished conduct of the
accused, any previous convictions of the accused either by
Security Force Court or a criminal court, any previous
punishments awarded to him by an officer exercising
authority under section 53 or 55 as the case may be: the length
of time he has been in arrest or in confinement on any
previous sentence, and any decoration, or reward, of which
he may be in possession or to which he is entitled.

(2) Evidence on the above matters may be given
by a witness verifying a statement which contains a summary
of entries in the service book respecting the accused and
identifying the accused as the person referred to in that
summary.

[PAGE 137]
BSF RULES136

(3) The accused may cross-examine any such
witness and may call witnesses to rebut such evidence and;
if the accused so requests, the service books or a duly certified
copy of the material entries therein, shall be produced and if
the accused alleges that the summary is in any respect not in
accordance with the service books or such certified copy, as
the case may be, the Court shall compare the summary with
those books or copy and if it finds that it is not in accordance
therewith, shall cause summary to be corrected or the
objection of the accused to be recorded.

(4) When all the evidence on the above matters has been
given, the accused may address the Court thereon and in
mitigation of punishment.

102. Sentence.- The Court shall award a single sentence
in respect of all the offences of which the accused is found
guilty, and such sentence shall be deemed to be awarded in
respect of which it can be legally given and not to be
awarded in respect of which it can not be legally given.

103. Recommendation for mercy.- (1) Where the Court
makes a recommendation to mercy it shall give its reasons
for its recommendation.

(2) The number of opinions by which the
recommendation to mercy mentioned in this rule, or any
question relative thereto is adopted or rejected may be entered
in the proceedings.

104. Announcement of the sentence and Signing and
Transmission of Proceedings.- (1) The sentence together
with any recommendation to mercy and the reasons for any
such recommendation shall be announced forthwith in open
Court. The sentence will be announced as subject to
confirmation.

(2) Upon the Court awarding the sentence, the
presiding officer shall affix his signature and date the sentence
and such signatures shall authenticate the whole of the
proceedings and the proceedings upon being signed by the
Law Officer (‘if any’) shall at once be transmitted for
confirmation.

[PAGE 138]
BSF RULES 137

105. Revision.- (1) (a) Where the finding is sent back for
revision under section 113, the Court shall re-assemble in
open Court, the revision order shall be read and if the Court,
is directed to take fresh evidence such evidence shall be taken
in open Court.

(b) Where such fresh evidence is recorded
otherwise than at the instance of the accused,
the accused shall be given a further
opportunity to lead evidence in respect of
matters brought out in such fresh evidence.

(c) The prosecutor and the accused shall be given
a further opportunity to address the Court in
respect of the fresh evidence led.

(d) The Law Officer may also give a further
summing up.
(2) Where the revision of finding does not
involve taking of fresh evidence, the accused shall be given
an opportunity to address the Court in respect of matter raised
in the revision order.

(3) (a) The Court shall then deliberate on its finding
in closed Court and if the Court does not
adhere to its former finding, it shall revoke
the finding and sentence and record a new
finding and if such new finding involves a
sentence pass sentence afresh.

(b) Where the original finding was one of ‘Not
Guilty’, the Court shall, before passing
sentence comply with Rules 101 and 102.

(4) (a) Where the sentence alone is sent back for
revision, the revision order shall be read in
open Court and the accused given an
opportunity to address the Court in regard to
matters referred to in the revision order.

[PAGE 139]
BSF RULES138

(b) The Court shall then reconsider its sentence in
closed Court and if it does not adhere to the
sentence, revoke the sentence and pass sentence
afresh.

(5) Where the sentence alone is sent for revision
the Court shall not revise the finding.

106. Confirmation and promulgation.- (1) When a
confirming authority receives the record of the proceedings
of a Court, it shall record its decision thereon and on any
sentence and any order which the Court may have made under
Section 105 on the record of the proceedings in the
appropriate form set out in Appendix VIII and such record
of his decision shall form part of the record of the
proceedings.

(2) When a Court has accepted a plea of guilty made
under rule 79 the confirming authority may confirm its
finding notwithstanding that the Court has accepted the plea
without the concurrence of the convening officer if in the
opinion of the confirming authority it is in the interests of
justice to do so.

(3) (a) When a Court has rejected a plea to the
jurisdiction of the Court or a plea in bar of
trial or has over-ruled an objection to a charge
it shall not be necessary for the confirming
authority to approve specifically the decision
of the Court, but its approval shall be implied
from its confirming the finding on the charge
to which the plea or objection relates.

(b) Where it disapproves the decision of the
Court to reject the plea or to over-rule the
objection it shall withhold confirmation of the
finding on the charge to which the plea or
objection relates.

(4) A Confirming authority may state its reasons for
withholding confirmation in any case, but if it withholds

[PAGE 140]
BSF RULES 139

confirmation where a Court has rejected a plea to the jurisdiction
or plea in bar of trial or has over-ruled an objection to the charges
because it disapproves this decision of the Court, it shall when
recording its decision under sub-rule (1) state that it has withheld
confirmation for this reason.

(5) Where the sentence of Court is improperly
expressed the confirming authority may in confirming the
sentence vary the form thereof so that it shall be properly
expressed.

(6) Whenever it appear that there is sufficient
evidence or a plea of guilty under either sub-rule (1) or subrule (2) of rule 77 to justify the finding of the Court such
finding and any lawful sentence consequent thereon may be
confirmed and if confirmed shall be valid, notwithstanding
any deviation from these rules if the accused has not been
prejudiced by such deviation.

(7) While confirming the finding the confirming
authority may either unconditionally or subject to conditions
which the accused accepts, reduce or remit a portion of the
sentence or commute the punishment to one given lower in
the scale of punishments in section 48.

(8) (a) When a confirming authority has confirmed a
finding and a sentence of a Court or has withheld confirmation
thereof, it shall send the record of the proceeding to the
Commandant of the accused for promulgation to the accused
of the finding and sentence or the fact that confirmation has
been withheld as the case may be.

(b) The fact of promulgation shall be recorded
on the record of the proceedings in the form set out in
Appendix IX.

(c) Where confirmation has been withheld
because the confirming authority disapproves the Court’s
decision to reject a plea to the jurisdiction or a plea in bar of
trial or to over-rule an objection to the charge the accused
shall be so informed.

[PAGE 141]
BSF RULES140

CHAPTER X

PROCEDURE OF SECURITY FORCE
COURTS AND INCIDENTAL MATTERS

107. Seating of members.- The members of a Court
shall take their seats according to their rank.

108. Responsibility of Presiding Officer.- (1) The
presiding officer is responsible for the trial being conducted
in proper order, and in accordance with the Act, rules made
there-under and in a manner befitting a court of justice.

(2) It is the duty of the presiding officer to see
that the accused has a fair trial, and that he does not suffer
any disadvantage in consequence of his position as a person
under trial, or of his ignorance, or of his incapacity to examine
or cross-examine witnesses, or otherwise.

109. Power of Court over address of prosecutor and
accused.- (1) It is the duty of the prosecutor to assist the
Court in the administration of justice, to behave impartially,
to bring the whole of the transaction before the Court and
not to take any unfair advantage of or suppress any evidence
in favour of the accused.

(2) The prosecutor may not refer to any matter
not relevant to the charge or charges then before the Court
and it is the duty of the Court to stop him from so doing and
also to restrain any undue violence of language or want of
fairness or moderation on the part of the prosecutor.

(3) The Court shall give reasonable facilities to
the accused, in making his defence; the accused must abstain
from any remarks contemptuous or disrespectful towards the
Court, and from coarse and insulting language towards
others, but he may for the purpose of his defence impeach
the evidence and charge other persons with blame and even
criminality, subject, if he does so, to any liability which he
may thereby incur. The Court may caution the accused as to

[PAGE 142]
BSF RULES 141

the irrelevance of his defence, but shall not, unless in special
cases stop his defence solely on ground of such irrelevance.

110. Sitting in closed Court.- (1) A Court shall where it
is so directed by these rules, and may in any other case on
any deliberation amongst the members, sit in closed Court.

(2) No person shall be present in closed Court
except the members of the Court, the Law Officer (if any)
and any officers under instruction.

(3) For the purpose of giving effect to the
foregoing provisions of this rule a Court may either retire or
cause the place where it sits to be cleared of all other persons
not entitled to be present.

(4) Except as here-in-before mentioned all
proceedings including the view of any place shall be in open
Court and in the presence of the accused subject to subrule(5).

(5) The Court shall have the power to exclude
from the Court any witness who has yet to give evidence or
any other person, other than the accused, who interferes with
its proceedings.

111. Continuity of trial and adjournment of Court. (1)
When a Court is once assembled and the accused has been
arraigned the Court shall continue the trial from day to day
in accordance with these rules unless it appears to the Court
that an adjournment is necessary for the ends of justice or
that such continuance is impracticable.

(2)(a) A Court may from time to time adjourn its
proceedings and meet at such place as may
be convenient or

(b) Wherever necessary, visit the scene of
occurrence.

(3) The senior officer on the spot may also for

[PAGE 143]
BSF RULES142

exigencies of service adjourn or prolong the
adjournment of the Court.

(4) A Court in the absence of a Law Officer (if
one has been appointed for the Court) shall not proceed and
shall adjourn.

(5) If the time to which an adjournment is made
is not specified the adjournment shall be until further
orders from the proper Force authority and if the place to
which an adjournment is made is not specified, the
adjournment shall be to the same place or to such other
place as may be specified in further orders from the proper
force authority.

112. Suspension of Trial.- Where, in consequence of
anything arising while the Court is sitting, the Court is unable
by reason of dissolutions as specified in section 71 or
otherwise, to continue the trial the presiding officer or, in
his absence the senior member present, shall immediately
report the facts to the convening authority.

113. Proceeding on death or illness of accused.- In case
of the death of the accused or of such illness of the accused
as renders it impossible to continue the trial the Court shall
ascertain the fact of the death or illness by evidence and
record the same and adjourn and transmit the proceedings to
the convening authority.

114. Death, retirement or absence of Presiding Officer. In
the case of the death, retirement on challenge or unavoidable
absence of the presiding officer the next senior officer shall take
the place of the presiding officer and the trial shall proceed if the
Court is still composed of not less than the minimum number of
officers of which it is required by law to consist.

115. Presence throughout of all members of Court.-
(1) A member of a Court who has been absent while any
part of the evidence on the trial of an accused person is taken,
shall take no further part in the trial by that Court of that

[PAGE 144]
BSF RULES 143

person, but the Court will not be affected unless it is reduced
below the legal minimum.

(2) An officer shall not be added to a Court after
the accused has been arraigned.

116. Taking of opinion of members of Court.- (1) Every
member of a Court must give his opinion by word of mouth
on every question which the Court has to decide, and must
give his opinion as to the sentence notwithstanding that he
has given his opinion in favour of acquittal.

(2) The opinions of the members of the Court shall be
taken in succession, beginning with the member lowest in
rank.

117. Procedure on Incidental Questions:- If any
objection is raised on any matter of law, evidence, or
procedure, by the prosecutor or by or on behalf of the accused
during the trial, the prosecutor or the accused or counsel or
the defending officer (as the case may be) shall have a right
to answer the same and the person raising the objection shall
have a right to reply.

118. Evidence when to be translated.- When any
evidence is given in a language which any of the officers
composing the Court, the accused or the law Officer does
not understand, it shall be translated into a language which
he understands.

119. Record in proceedings of Transactions of a
Security Force Court.-(1) At a Court the Law Officer or, if
there is none, the presiding officer shall record or cause to
be recorded all transactions of the Court, and shall be
responsible for the accuracy of the record (in these rules
referred to as the proceedings) and if the Law officer is called
as a witness by the accused the presiding officer shall be
responsible for the accuracy of the record in the proceedings
of the evidence of the Law Officer.

[PAGE 145]
BSF RULES144

(2) The evidence shall be taken down in a
narrative form in as nearly as possible the words used, but
in any case where the prosecutor, the accused, the Law
Officer, or the Court considers it material, the question and
answer shall be taken down verbatim.

(3) Where an objection has been taken to any
question or to the admission of any evidence or to the
procedure of the Court, such objection shall if the prosecutor
or accused so requests or the Court thinks fit, be entered
upon the proceedings together with the grounds of the
objection and the decision of the Court thereon.

(4) Where any address by, or on behalf of the
prosecutor or the accused, is not in writing, it shall not be
necessary to record the same in the proceedings further or
otherwise than the Court thinks proper, except that;

(a) the Court shall in every case make such
record of the defence, made by the accused
as will enable the confirming officer to judge
of the reply made by, or on behalf of the
accused to each charge against him, and

(b) the Court shall also record any particular
matters in the address by or on behalf of , the
prosecutor or the accused which the
prosecutor or the accused, as the case may
be, may require.

(5) The Court shall not enter in the proceedings
any comment or anything not before the Court, or any report
of any fact not forming part of the trial, but if any such
comment or report seems to the Court necessary, the Court
may forward it to the proper authority in a separate document
signed by the presiding officer.

120. Custody and Inspection of Proceedings.- The
proceedings shall be deemed to be in the custody of the Law
Officer (if any), or, if there is none, of the presiding officer but
may, with proper precaution for their safety, be inspected by the
members of the Court, the prosecutor and accused at all reasonable
times before the Court is closed to consider the finding.

[PAGE 146]
BSF RULES 145

1[121. Review of General and Petty Security Force Court
proceeding:- The proceedings of a General and Petty
Security Force Court shall be sent by the person having the
custody thereof to the Chief Law Officer for review, who
shall then forward the same to the confirming authority.

122. Defending Officer, Friend of Accused and
Counsel:- (1) At any General or Petty Security Force Court
an accused person may be represented by a counsel or by
any officer subject to the Act who shall be called “the
defending officer” or assisted by any person whose services
he may be able to procure and who shall be called “the friend
of the accused”.

(2) The defending officer shall have the same
rights and duties as appertain to a counsel under these rules
and shall be under the like obligations. (R.63).

(3) The friend of the accused may advise the
accused on all points and suggest the questions to be put to
the witnesses, but he shall not examine or cross-examine
the witnesses or address the Court.

123. Requirements for Appearance of Counsel.-(1) An
accused person intending to be represented by a counsel shall
give to his Commandant or to the convening officer the earliest
practicable notice of such intention, and, if no sufficient notice
has been given, the Court may, if it thinks fit, on the application
of the prosecutor adjourn to enable him to obtain a counsel on
behalf of the prosecutor at the trial.

(2) Where the convening officer so directs,
counsel may appear alongwith the prosecutor, but in that
case, unless the notice referred to in sub-rule(1) has been
given by the accused, notice of the direction for counsel to
appear shall be given to the accused at such time (not in any
case less than seven days) before the trial as would, in the
opinion of the Court, have enabled the accused to obtain
counsel to assist him at the trial.
1. Substituted vide S.O.-155 (E) dated 1-3-1983.

[PAGE 147]
BSF RULES146

(3) The counsel, who appears before a Court on
behalf of the prosecutor or accused, shall have the same rights
as the prosecutor or accused for whom he appears to call,
and orally examine, cross-examine, and re-examine
witnesses, to put in any plea, and to inspect the proceedings
and shall have the right otherwise to act in the course of the
trial in place of the person on whose behalf he appears, and
he shall comply with these rules as if he were that person
and in such a case that person shall have no right himself
to do any of the aforesaid matters except as regards the
statement allowed by sub-rule (2) of rule 93 and sub-rule
(4) of rule 101 or except so far as the Court permits him
so to do.

(4) When counsel appear on behalf of the
prosecutor; the prosecutor if called as witness, may be
examined and re-examined as any other witness.

124. Disqualification of law Officer.- An Officer who is
disqualified for sitting on a Court, shall be disqualified for
acting as a Law Officer at that Court.

125. Substitution on Death, Illness or Absence of Law
Officer.- If the Law Officer dies, or from illness or from any
cause whatever is unable to attend, the Court shall adjourn
and the presiding officer shall report the circumstances to
the convening officer and a fit person may be appointed by
that officer who shall be sworn or affirmed and act as Law
officer for the residue of the trial, or until the Law Officer
returns.

126. Power and duties of Law Officer (1) Where a
Law Officer has been named to act on the Court, he shall -

(a) give his opinion on any question of law
relating to the charge or trial whenever so
required by the Court, the prosecutor or the
accused;

(b) inform the Court of any irregularity or other
infirmity in the proceedings;

[PAGE 148]
BSF RULES 147

(c) inform the convening officer and the Court
of any infirmity or defect in the charge or in
the constitution of the Court;

(d) sum up the evidence and give his opinion on
any question of law, before the Court proceeds
to deliberate upon its findings.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Law Officer to
ensure that the accused does not suffer any disadvantage in
consequence of his position as such, or because of ignorance
or incapacity to examine or cross-examine witnesses and for
this purpose the Law Officer may, with the permission of
the Court, call witnesses and put questions to them which
appear to him to be necessary or desirable.

(3) In the discharge of his duties, the Law Officer
shall maintain an attitude of strict impartiality.

(4) Where any opinion has been given by the Law
Officer to the Court on any matter before it, it may be entered
in the proceedings, if the Law Officer or the Court, desires it
to be entered.

(5) The Law Officer shall represent the Chief Law officer
at a Security Force Court.

127. Finding of Insanity.- Where the Court finds either
that the accused, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is
incapable of making his defence, or that he committed the
act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind
incapable of knowing the nature of the act or that it was
wrong or contrary to law, the presiding officer or in the case
of Summary Security Force Court, the officer holding the
trial, shall affix his signature and the date on the finding which
shall also be signed by the Law Officer (if any) and thereupon
the proceedings shall, at once be transmitted to the confirming
authority or in the case of Summary Security Force Court to
the Deputy Inspector General empowered to Countersign
them.

[PAGE 149]
BSF RULES148

128. Preservation of Proceedings.- The proceedings of
every Court shall, after promulgation, be forwarded to the
office of the Chief Law Officer and be preserved there for
not less than seven years, or until the sentence awarded by
the Court has expired, whichever is later.

129. Right of person tried to Copies of Proceedings.-
Every person tried by a Security Force Court shall be entitled
to obtain on demand, at anytime after the confirmation of
the finding and sentence, when such confirmation is required
and before the proceedings are destroyed, from the Chief
Law officer a copy thereof, including the proceedings upon
revision, if any.

130. Copy of proceedings not to be given in certain
cases.- Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 129 if
the Central Government is satisfied for reasons to be
recorded that it is against the interests of the Security of the
State or friendly relations with foreign States to supply a
copy of the proceedings or any part thereof under the said
rule, he shall not be furnished with such a copy:

Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied
that the person demanding the copy is desirous of submitting
a petition in accordance with the Act or instituting any action
in a court of law in relation to the finding or sentence, it
shall permit inspection of the proceedings by such a person
or his legal advisor, if any, on the following conditions,
namely:-

(a) the inspection shall be made at such times
and such places as the Central Government
or any authority authorised by it may direct;
and

(b) the person allowed to inspect the proceedings
shall, before such inspection, furnish:-

(i) an undertaking, in writing that he
shall not make copies of the
proceedings or any part thereof and

[PAGE 150]
BSF RULES 149

that the information or documents
contained in such proceedings shall
not be used by him for any purpose
whatsoever, other than for the purpose
of submitting a petition in accordance
with the Act or instituting an action
in a court of law in relation to the said
finding or sentence; and

(ii) a certificate that he is aware that he
may render himself liable to
prosecution under section 3 and 5 of
the Indian Official Secrets Act, 1923
(19 of 1923) if he commits any act
specified in the said sections in
relation to the documents or
information contained in the said
proceedings.

131. Loss of proceedings.- (1) If, before confirmation,
the original proceedings of a Court which require
confirmation or any part thereof, are lost, a copy thereof, if
any, certified by the presiding officer or the Law Officer at
the Court may be accepted in lieu of the original.

(2) If there is no such copy, and sufficient
evidence of the charge, finding, sentence, and transactions
of the Court can be procured that evidence may with the
assent of the accused, be accepted in lieu of the original
proceedings, or part which have been lost.

(3) In any case mentioned above in this rule the
finding and sentence may be confirmed, and shall be valid
as if the original proceedings or part thereof had not been
lost.

(4) If the accused refuses the assent referred to
in sub-rule (2), he may be tried again, and the finding and
sentence of the previous Court of which the proceedings have
been lost shall be void.

[PAGE 151]
BSF RULES150

(5) If, after confirmation or in any case where confirmation
is not required, the original proceedings or any part thereof
are lost, and there is sufficient evidence of the charge, finding,
sentence, and transactions of the Court and of the confirmation
(if required) of the finding and sentence, that evidence shall
be a valid and sufficient record of the trial for all purposes.

132. Offences by witnesses and others.- When a Court
is of opinion that there is ground for inquiring into any
offence specified in Sections 37 and 38 and committed before
it or brought to its notice in the course of its proceedings,
which would if done by a person subject to the Act, have
constituted such an offence, such Court may proceed as
follows, that is to say:-

(a) if the person who appears to have committed
the offence is subject to the Act, the Court
may bring his conduct to the notice of his
Commandant;
(b) if the person who appears to have done the
act is amenable to military, naval or air force
law the Court may bring his conduct to the
notice of the proper military, naval or air force
authority as the case may be,
(c) in other cases the officer who summoned the
witness to appear or the presiding officer or
Officer-holding the Court, as the case may
be, may forward a written complaint to the
nearest Magistrate of the first class having
jurisdiction, and in the case of acts which
would, if done by a person subject to this
Act have constituted an offence under clause
(e) of section 37 or section 38, the Court,
after making any preliminary inquiry that
may be necessary may send the case to the
nearest Magistrate of the first class having
jurisdiction for inquiry or trial in accordance
with section 476 of the Code of Criminal
procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).]1

1. Now Sections 340 and 343 of Cr. P.C. 1973.

[PAGE 152]
BSF RULES 151

CHAPTER-XI

SUMMARY SECURITY FORCE COURTS

133. Proceedings.- The officer holding the trial, here-in-after
in this Chapter called the Court shall record, or cause to be recorded
the transactions of every Summary Security Force Court.

134. Evidence when to be translated.- (1) When any
evidence is given in a language which the Court or the accused
does not understand, that evidence shall be translated to the
Court or accused as the case may be in a language which it
or he does understand.

(2) The Court shall for this purpose either appoint
an interpreter, or shall itself take the oath or affirmation
prescribed for the interpreter at a Summary Security Force
Court.

(3) When documents are produced for the
purpose of formal proof, it shall be in the discretion of the
Court to cause as much to be interpreted as appears necessary.

135. Assembly.- When the Court, the interpreter (if any)
and the officers and subordinate officers attending the trial
are assembled, the accused shall be brought before the Court
and the oath or affirmation prescribed in rule 136 shall be
taken by the persons therein mentioned.

136. Swearing or affirming of court and interpreter.-
The Court shall take oath or affirmation in any one of the
following forms or in such other form to the same purport
which would, according to the religion or otherwise be
binding on the conscience of the officer constituting the Court.

FORM OF OATH
“I, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . swear by Almighty God
that I will duly administer justice, according to the Border
Security Force Act, 1968 without partiality, favour or
affection”.

[PAGE 153]
BSF RULES152

FORM OF AFFIRMATION

“I,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . do solemnly, sincerely and
truly declare and affirm that I will duly administer justice
according to the Border Security Force Act, 1968 without
partiality, favour or affection”.

(2) The Court, or any other person empowered
by it in this behalf shall administer to the interpreter (if any)
an oath or affirmation in any of the following forms, or in
such other forms to the same purport as the Court ascertains
to be according to the religion or otherwise binding on the
conscience of the person who is to act as interpreter.

FORM OF OATH

“I, . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . swear by Almighty God that
I will faithfully interpret and translate as I shall be required
to do touching the matter before this Court”.

FORM OF AFFIRMATION

“I, .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . do solemnly, sincerely and
truly declare and affirm that I will faithfully interpret and
translate, as I shall be required to do touching the matter
before this Court”.

(3) The witnesses shall, after the administration
of the oath and the affirmation, withdraw from the Court.

137. Swearing of Court to try several accused persons.-
(1) A Summary Security Force Court may be sworn or
affirmed at the same time to try any number of accused
persons then present before it whether those persons are to
be tried collectively or separately.

(2) In the case of several accused persons to be
tried separately, the Court, when sworn or affirmed shall
proceed with one case postponing the other cases and taking
them afterwards in succession.

[PAGE 154]
BSF RULES 153

(3) Where several accused persons are tried
separately upon charges arising out of the same transaction,
the Court may, if it considers it to be desirable in the
interests of justice, postpone consideration of any sentence
to be awarded to any one or more such accused persons
until the trials of all such accused persons have been
completed.

138. Arraignment of accused.- (1) After the Court and
interpreter (if any) are sworn or affirmed as above mentioned,
the accused shall be arraigned on the charges against him.

(2) The Charges on which the accused is
arraigned shall be read and if necessary, translated to him
and explained and he shall be required to plead separately to
each charge.

139. Objection by accused to charge.- The accused,
when required to plead to any charge, may object to the
charge on the ground that it does not disclose an offence
under the Act, or is not in accordance with these rules.

140. Amendment of charge.- (1) At any time during the
trial if it appears to the Court that there is mistake in the
name or description of the accused in the charge-sheet, it
shall amend the charge-sheet so as to correct that mistake.

(2) If on the trial of a charge it appears to the
Court at any time before it has begun to examine the
witnesses, that in the interests of justice any addition to,
omission from or alteration in, the change is required, it may
amend such charge and may, after due notice to the accused,
and with the sanction of the officer empowered to convene
a Petty Security Force Court for the trial of the accused if
the amended charge requires such sanction, proceed with
the trial on such amended charge.

141. Special pleas: If a special plea to the general
jurisdiction of the Court, or a plea in bar of trial is offered by
the accused, the procedure laid down in Chapter IX for
disposing of such pleas shall, so far as may be applicable be
followed.

[PAGE 155]
BSF RULES154

142. General plea of “Guilty” or “Not Guilty”.- (1)
The accused person’s plea of ‘Guilty’ or ‘Not Guilty’ or if
he refuses to plead or does not plead intelligibly either one
or the other, a plea of ‘Not Guilty’ shall be recorded on each
charge.

(2) If an accused person pleads ‘Guilty’ that plea
shall be recorded as the finding of the Court but before it is
recorded, the Court shall ascertain that the accused
understands the nature of the charge to which he has pleaded
guilty and shall inform him of the general effect of that plea,
and in particular of the meaning of the charge to which he
has pleaded guilty, and of the difference in procedure which
will be made by the plea of guilty and shall advise him to
withdraw that plea if it appears from the record or abstract
of evidence (if any) or otherwise that the accused ought to
plead not guilty.

(3) Where an accused person pleads guilty to the
first two or more charges laid in the alternative, the Court
may after sub-rule (2) has been complied with and before
the accused is arraigned on the alternative charge or charges,
withdraw such alternative charge or charges as follow the
charge to which the accused has pleaded guilty without
requiring the accused to plead thereto, and a record to that
effect shall be made in the proceedings of the Court.

143. Procedure after plea of ‘Guilty’.- (1) Upon the
record of the plea of ‘Guilty’, if there are other charges in the
same charge-sheet to which the plea is ‘Not Guilty’, the trial
shall first proceed with respect to those other charges and after
the finding on those charges, shall proceed with the charges
on which a plea of ‘Guilty’ has been entered; but if there
are alternative charges, the Court may either proceed with
respect to all the charges as if the accused had not pleaded
‘Guilty’ to any charge or may, instead of trying him, record
a finding of ‘Guilty’ upon any one of the alternative charges
to which he had pleaded ‘Guilty’ and finding of ‘Not Guilty’
upon all the other alternative charges which precede such
charge.

[PAGE 156]
BSF RULES 155

(2)(a) After the record of the plea of ‘Guilty’ on a charge
(if trial does not proceed on any other charges)
the Court shall read the record or abstract of
evidence and annex it to the proceedings, or if
there is no such record or abstract, shall take
and record sufficient evidence to enable it to
determine the sentence, and the reviewing officer
to know all the circumstances connected with
the offence.

(b) The evidence shall be taken in like manner as is
directed by these rules in the case of a plea of
‘Not Guilty’.

(3) The accused may, after such evidence has
been taken or as the case may be, the record or abstract of
evidence has been read, address the Court with reference to
the charge and in mitigation of punishment and may call
witnesses as to his character.

(4) (a) If from the statement of the accused, or from
the record of evidence, or otherwise, it appears
to the Court that the accused did not
understand the effect of his plea of ‘Guilty’,
the Court shall alter the record and enter a
plea of ‘Not Guilty’ and proceed with the
trial accordingly.

(b) Any alternative charges withdrawn under subrule(1) shall be reinstated in the charge sheet
and the trial shall take place as if they had
never been withdrawn.

(5) If a plea of ‘Guilty’ is recorded on some
charges and the trial proceeds with respect to other charges
in the same charge-sheet, the proceedings under sub-rule (2)
and (3) shall take place after the findings on the other charges
in the same charge-sheet are recorded.

(6) When the accused states anything in mitigation

[PAGE 157]
BSF RULES156

of punishment which in the opinion of the Court requires to be
proved, and would, if proved, affect the amount of punishment,
the Court may permit the accused to call witness to prove the
same.

144. Withdrawal of plea of ‘Not Guilty’.- The accused
may, if he thinks fit at any time during the trial, withdraw his
plea of ‘Not Guilty’ and plead ‘Guilty’ and in such case the
Court shall at once, subject to compliance with sub-rule (2) of
rule 142 record a plea and finding of ‘Guilty’ and shall, so far
as if necessary, proceed in manner directed by Rule 143.

145. Procedure after plea of ‘Not Guilty’.- (1) After
the plea of “Not Guilty” to any charge, is recorded the
evidence for the prosecution will be taken.

(2) At the close of the evidence for the
prosecution the accused shall be asked if he has anything to
say in his defence, or may defer such address until he has
called his witnesses.

(3) The accused may then call his witnesses,
including also witnesses to character.

146. Witnesses in reply to defence.- The Court may, if it
thinks it necessary in the interests of justice, call witnesses
in reply to the defence.

147. Evidence of witnesses.- The provisions of Rules 88,
89 and 90 shall so far as may be, apply to the evidence of
witnesses at a Summary Security Force Court as they apply
to the evidence of witnesses at a General or Petty Security
Force Court.

148. Verdict.- The Court shall after the evidence for
prosecution and defence has been heard, give its opinion as
to whether the accused is guilty or not guilty of the charge or
charges.

149. Finding.- (1) The finding on every charge upon which

[PAGE 158]
BSF RULES 157

the accused is arraigned shall be recorded and except as
mentioned in these rules shall be recorded simply as a finding of
‘Guilty’ or of ‘Not Guilty’.

(2) When the Court is of opinion as regards any
charge that the facts proved do not disclose the offence
charged or any offence of which he might under the Act
legally be found guilty on the charge as laid, the Court shall
find the accused ‘Not Guilty’ of that charge.

(3) When the Court is of opinion as regards any
charge that the facts found to be proved in evidence differ
materially from the facts alleged in the statement of
particulars in the charge, but are nevertheless sufficient to
prove the offence stated in the charge, and that the difference
is not so material as to have prejudiced the accused in his
defence, it may, instead of a finding of ‘Not Guilty’ record a
special finding.

(4) The special finding may find the accused
guilty on a charge subject to the statement of exceptions or
variations specified therein.

(5) The Court shall not find the accused guilty
on more than one of two or more charges laid in the
alternative, even if conviction upon one charge necessarily
connotes guilty upon the alternative charge or charges.

150. Procedure on Acquittal.- Where the finding on each
of the charges in a charge-sheet is ‘Not Guilty’, the court
shall affix its signature and date the proceedings, the findings
will be announced in open Court, and the accused will be
released if under arrest, in respect of these charges.

151. Procedure on finding of ‘Guilty’.- (1) Where the
finding on any charge is ‘Guilty’ the Court may record of its
own knowledge, or take evidence of any record, the general
character, age, service, rank, and any recognised acts of
gallantry, or distinguished conduct of the accused, and
previous convictions of the accused either by a Security Force

[PAGE 159]
BSF RULES158

Court, or a Criminal Court, any previous punishment awarded to
him by an officer exercising authority under section 53, the length
of time he has been in arrest or in confinement of any previous
sentence, and any decoration, or reward of which he may be in
possession or to which he may be entitled.

(2) Where the Court does not record the matters
mentioned in this rule of its own knowledge, evidence on
these matters may be taken in the manner directed in rule
101 for similar evidence.

152. Sentence.- The Court shall award one sentence in
respect of all the offences of which the accused is found guilty.

153. Signing of Proceedings.- The Court shall affix its
signature and the date to the sentence and such signature
shall authenticate the whole of the proceedings.

154. Charges in different charge sheets.- (1) When the
charges at a trial by Summary Security Force Court are
contained in different charge-sheets the accused shall be tried
on each charge sheet separately up to and including the stage
of finding.

(2) The Court shall, thereafter, comply with rules
150 or 151 as the case may be.

155. Clearing the Court. The officer holding the trial may
clear the Court to consider the evidence or to consult with
the officers, and subordinate officer, attending the trial.

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-rule (1), all
the proceedings, including the view of any place, shall be in
open Court, and in the presence of the accused.

156. Adjournment.- (1) A Court may:-

(a) from time to time adjourn its proceedings and
meet at such place as may be convenient; and
(b) wherever necessary visit the scene of
occurrence.
157. Friend of the accused.- During a trial at a Summary

[PAGE 160]
BSF RULES 159

Security Force Court an accused may take the assistance of any
person, including a legal practitioner as he may consider necessary.
Provided that such person shall not examine or crossexamine witnesses or address the Court.

158. Memorandum to be attached to proceedings.-
Where a Summary Security Force Court tries an offence
which shall not ordinarily be tried without reference to an
authority mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 74, an
explanatory memorandum shall be attached to the
proceedings.

159. Promulgation.- The sentence of a Summary Security
Force Court shall be promulgated in the manner usual in the
service, at the earliest opportunity after it has been
pronounced and shall subject to the provisions of the Act be
carried out without delay after promulgation.

160. Review of Proceedings.- The proceedings of a
Summary Security Force Court shall immediately on
promulgation be forwarded through the Chief Law Officer,
or a Law Officer to the Deputy Inspector General under whom
the accused may have been serving.

161. Action by the Deputy Inspector General.- (1)
Where the Deputy Inspector General to whom the
proceedings of a Summary Security Force Court have been
forwarded under rule 160, is satisfied that injustice has been
done to the accused by reason of any grave irregularity in the
proceedings or otherwise, he may:-

(a) set aside the proceedings of the Court; or

(b) reduce the sentence or commute the
punishment awarded to one lower in the scale of punishment
given in 1(Section 48 and return it to the unit of the accused
for promulgation).
(2) Where no action under sub-rule (1) has been
taken he shall countersign the proceedings 1(***).

1. Subs. by SO.436 (E) dated 29-05-1990

[PAGE 161]
BSF RULES160

(3) The proceedings shall, after its promulgation
2 [under sub-rule (1) or counter signature under sub-rule (2)]
be forwarded to the Chief Law Officer for custody.

1. Omitted by S.O. 436 (E), dated 29-5-1990.
2. Ins. by ibid.

[PAGE 162]
BSF RULES 161

CHAPTER-XII

EXECUTION OF SENTENCE

162. Direction about Sentence of Imprisonment.- (1)
A confirming authority or in the case of a Summary Security
Force Court, the Court, shall direct that the sentence of
imprisonment shall be undergone by confinement either in a
civil prison or in Force Custody.

(2) Such direction may be varied by any superior
officer.

163. Warrants.- Warrants for committing a person to a
civil prison to under-go sentence of imprisonment or to get
such person back into Force Custody if so required or to
order the release of such a person from civil prison or any
variation done by any superior officer shall be in such form
as may be appropriate to each case set out in Appendix ‘X’.

(2) Such Warrants shall be signed by the
Commandant of the accused or by a staff officer on behalf of
a Deputy Inspector General, Inspector General or the Director
General.

164. Warrants in case of Sentence of Death.- (1)Where
a person is sentenced to death by hanging, a warrant in the
form set out in Appendix XI shall be sent by the Director
General to the Superintendent of the Prison where facilities
for carrying out such a sentence exist, after the sentence has
been confirmed by the Central Government and the accused
shall be committed to the same prison by his Commandant
on the appropriate warrant.

(2) Where an accused person is sentenced to
death by being shot, a warrant on the appropriate form set
out in Appendix XI shall be issued by the Director General,
to Deputy Inspector General under whom the accused may
be serving, after the sentence has been confirmed by the
Central Government, and the Deputy Inspector General shall
arrange for the execution of the sentence.

[PAGE 163]
BSF RULES162

165. Changes in Sentence.- Where any change is made
in the sentence of a person already committed to a civil prison,
such change shall be communicated to the Superintendent
of the Prison to which such person has been committed by
the Commandant or such other person as is mentioned in
rule 163 on the form set out in Appendix XII.

166. Sentence of Dismissal.- (1) Sentence of dismissal
shall take effect from the date of promulgation of such
sentence or from any subsequent date as may be specified at
the time of promulgation.

(2) A sentence of dismissal combined with
imprisonment to be undergone in a civil prison shall not take
effect until such person has been committed to civil prison.

[PAGE 164]
BSF RULES 163

CHAPTER-XIII

PETITIONS

167. Petitions Against Finding and Sentence of Court.-
(1) A person subject to the Act who has been tried by a Court
shall be allowed to put in one petition before confirmation,
to the confirming authority and one petition after
confirmation to any officer mentioned in section 117.

(2) In the case of a Summary Force Court he shall
be allowed to put in one petition only to any of the officers
mentioned in section 117.

168. Period of Limitation.- (1) A petition, before
confirmation, shall be submitted, within one week of the
conclusion of trial.

(2) A petition after confirmation shall be
submitted within 3 months of the date on which the sentence
was promulgated:

Provided that the time taken by such person to obtain
a copy of the proceedings shall be excluded in calculating
this period of 3 months.

169. Mode of Submitting Petitions.-

(1) (a) A petition, by a person who is still a member
of the Force shall be submitted through his
Commandant.

(b) A petition, by a person who has ceased to be
a member of the Force shall be submitted to
the Commandant of the unit in which the trial
was held.

(2) An officer to whom a petition is submitted
or to whom a petition has been forwarded shall forward it to
the next superior within a period of one week:

[PAGE 165]
BSF RULES164

Provided that an officer may not forward a petition
if he is competent to give the redress asked for and decides
to do so.

(3) An officer receiving a petition may send it to the
Chief Law Officer or a Law Officer for advice.

[PAGE 166]
BSF RULES 165

CHAPTER-XIV

COURTS OF INQUIRY

1[170. Composition.- A Court of Inquiry may consist of
one or more members. Persons not subject to the Act may
be appointed as members when the court is to investigate
matters of a specialised nature, and when officers subject to
the Act with specialist qualifications are not available to be
members.

171. Assembly.- A court of inquiry may be assembled by
order of a Commandant or any officer or authority superior
to the Commandant.

172. Assembly Order.- The order assembling the court
of inquiry shall state the composition of the court, the time
and place for its assembly and clearly state the matters which
the court will investigate. It will also provide for the
administrative requirements of the Court.

173. Procedure of Courts of Inquiry.-(1) The
proceedings of a court of inquiry shall not be open to the
public. Only such persons may attend the proceedings as are
permitted by the court to do so.

(2) The evidence of all witnesses shall be taken
on oath or affirmation.

(3) Evidence given by witnesses shall be recorded
in narrative form unless the court considers that any questions
and answers may be recorded as such.

(4) The court may take into consideration any
documents even though they are not formally proved.

(5) The court may ask witnesses any questions,
in any form, that they consider necessary to elicit the truth
and may take into consideration any evidence, whether the
same is admissible under the Indian Evidence At, 1872 (1 of
1872) or not.

1. Subs. by S.O. 187(E), dated 23-3-1984.

[PAGE 167]
BSF RULES166

(6) No counsel or legal practitioner shall be
permitted to appear before a court of inquiry.

(7) Provisions of section 89 shall apply for
procuring the attendance of witnesses before the court of inquiry.

(8) Before giving an opinion against any person
subject to the Act, the court will afford that person the
opportunity to know all that has been stated against him, crossexamine any witnesses who have given evidence against him,
and make a statement and call witnesses in his defence.

(9) The answers given by a witness to any question
asked before the court shall not be admissible against such a
witness on any charge at any subsequent occasion except a
charge of giving false evidence before such court.

174. Courts of Inquiry when to be Held.- (1) A court of
inquiry may be held to investigate into any disciplinary matter
or any other matter of importance.

(2) In addition to a Court of Inquiry required to
be held under section 62, a court of inquiry shall be held in
the following cases:-

(a) (i) All unnatural death of persons subject
to the Act or of other persons within the
Force lines, an immediate report shall
be sent through the messenger to the
officer-in-charge of the Police Station
within whose jurisdiction the place of
such unnatural death is.
(ii) In cases when such report cannot, for any
reason be delivered within a reasonable
time, a Court of Inquiry shall be held into
such unnatural death.
(iii) Immediately on receipt of information
of an unnatural death the Commandant
or the senior most officer of the Battalion
present shall prepare a report on the
proforma set out in Appendix XIII.

[PAGE 168]
BSF RULES 167

(b) All injuries sustained by persons subject to the Act
which are likely to cause full or partial disability.
The court shall in such case determine whether such
injuries were attributable to service or not.

(c) All financial irregularities, losses, theft and
misappropriation of public or Force property, where
it is necessary to obtain the order of a superior officer
on such irregularities, loss, theft or misappropriation.

(d) All losses of secret documents and any other material
of secret or above security classification. Such a court
of inquiry shall be ordered by an officer or authority
superior to the unit Commandant having the lost
document or material on its charge.

(e) All damage to private persons or property in respect
of which there is likely to be a claim against the
Government or the Force.

175. Action on the Proceedings of a Court of Inquiry.-
The proceedings of a court of inquiry shall be submitted by
the presiding officer to the officer or authority who ordered
the court. Such officer or authority on receiving the
proceedings may either pass final orders on the proceedings
himself, if he is empowered to do so, or refer them to a
superior authority.

176. Copies of Court of Inquiry Proceedings.- A person
subject to the Act against whom the court of inquiry has
given an opinion or who is being tried by a Security Force
Court on a charge relating to matter investigated by the court
of inquiry, shall be entitled to copies of the proceedings of
the court of inquiry unless the Director General orders
otherwise.

[PAGE 169]
168 BSF RULES

CHAPTER-XV

MISCELLANCOUS

177. Prescribed Officer under Section 11 (2).- The
Commandant may, under sub-section (2) of section 11,
dismiss or remove from the service any person under his
command other than a officer or a subordinate officer.

178. Authority prescribed for the purposes of Section
13 (1).- The authority for the purposes of sub-section (1) of
section 13 shall be:-
(i) Commandant, in respect of person under his
command;
(ii) Deputy Inspector General, in respect of a
Commandant;
(iii) Inspector Genral, in respect of a Deputy
Inspector General;
(iv) Director-General, in respect of all persons
subject to the Act;

179. Extent of Punishment.- (1) If the Commandant
is of and above the rank of a Deputy Commandant he may
award to the full extent one or more of the punishments
specified in section 53.

(2) If the Commandant is below the rank of a
Deputy Commandant he may award punishment specified:-

(a) in clauses (a) and (b) of section 53 upto
fourteen days.
(b) in other clauses of section 53 to the full extent.

180. Manner of proceedings against a person under
section 55 (1).- The manner in which an officer shall under
sub-section (1) of section 55 proceed against a person of or
below the rank of a subordinate officer who is charged with
an offence under the Act, be as, set out in Appendix-XIV.

181. Repeal and Savings.- (1) All rules and orders relating
to the matters covered by these rules shall stand repealed in
so far as they are inconsistent with any of the provisons of
these rules.

[PAGE 170]
BSF RULES 169

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done
or any action taken under the provisions of the rules or orders
so repealed shall, in so far as such thing or action is not
inconsistent with the provisions of these rules, be deemed to
have been done or taken under the provisons of these rules
as if the said provisons were in force when such thing was
done or such action was taken and shall continue in force
accordingly until superseded by anything done or any action
taken under these rules.

[PAGE 171]
170 BSF RULES

CHAPTER-XVI

182. Transitory Provisions:- Any rule or order applicable to
the Force on the date these rules come into force will unless
repugnant to these rules, continue to apply unless and until
abrogated or modified by the Central Government or any other
competent authority.

APPENDIX-I
(Rule-13)
(Border Security Force Recruiting Form)

Blood Group......................General No.............................................
Battalion......................................

1. Name....................................... 2 Religion...................................
3. Caste/Tribe.................4.Father’s Name....................................
(In case of Scheduled Castes and Tribes only).
5. Heir.....................
6. Date of Birth by Christian Era................
(As nearly as can be ascertained).
7. Height.............................Cms. 8. Chest..........................Cms.
9. Identification Marks................................................................
10. Residence,Village...........................Thana...............................
District........................................State.....................................
11. Character and antecedents.......................................................
verified by:
12. Occupation prior to enlistment................................................
13. Educational qualifications, if any............................................
14. Date of enrolment....................................................................
15. Enrolled as..............................................................................
Photograph

Date of Photograph...................

[PAGE 172]
BSF RULES 171

FORM OF ENROLMENT
Enrolment of

No......................Name (In Block Letters)................................
as a............................................in the Border Security Force.

PART-I
(Questions to be put before Enrolment)

You are warned that if after enrolment, it is found
that you have given a wilfully false answer to any of the first
twelve of the following questions you will be liable to be
punished as provided in the Border Security Force Act, 1968.

(ALL THE ANSWERS ARE TO BE WRITTEN IN BLOCK
LETTERS)

Question

1. What is your Name?
(Underline Surname)

2. (a) What is your place of birth?
State Village/Town, District
and State of Birth.

(b) What is your date of birth?
(State in Christian Era)

(N.B.):- To support the date of birth the person being enrolled
will be required to produce in original, together with an attested
copy, one of the certificates specified in Government orders
from time to time.

3. What is your permanent Home address?

(a) Village/Town
(b) Thana
(c) Pargannah/Tehsil
(d) District/Taluka
(e) State

[PAGE 173]
172 BSF RULES

4. (a) What is your religion?
(b) Are you a member of a Scheduled
Caste or Scheduled Tribe?
If so State Caste or Tribe?
5. (a) Are you a citizen of India? If so,
whether by birth or descent or
registration or naturalization or
otherwise?
(b) Are you a subject of Nepal or
Sikkim? If so, state of which
of the two?
(c) If you are not a citizen of India
or a subject of Nepal or Sikkim,
what is your Nationality?

N.B.:- In the case of foreign nationals other than subjects of
Nepal or Sikkim, consent of the Central Government
signified in writing, if any, should be produced before a
person is enrolled.

(d) Have you migrated from areas
now in Pakistan? If so, State the
date of your migration.

6. What are your educational qualifications?
(Original Certificates, with one attested
copy of each, are to be produced)

7. Are you married?*

If so State

(i) Date of marriage (s)
(ii) Name (s) of wife/wives.
(iii) Nationality of wife/wives.

* (This does not include widower/divorced).

[PAGE 174]
BSF RULES 173

8. (a) What is your father’s name and
address? If dead, state last
address District and State.

(b) What is or was the nationality of
your father? If he is or was an
Indian citizen, state whether by
birth, descent, registration,
naturalization or otherwise.

9. Are you or have you ever been a member
of a party or organisation of a political,
communal or cultural nature? If so, state
the name of the party or organisation with
the period/periods of your membership
therein.

10. (a) Are you in Government Service
or have you been a Government
servant? If so, state full
particulars and the reason for
discharge and confirm that you
were never dismissed from any
Government service.

(b) Are you in receipt of any
allowance from the
Government? If so, on what
account?

11. (a) Do you now belong to any of the
Armed Forces of India, the
Reserves of any of the three
services, the Auxiliary Air Force,
the Territorial Army, any Police
Force in India or the Nepal State
Army or any of the Forces of a
Foreign Country?

(b) Have you ever served in any of
the Armed Force in India, the

[PAGE 175]
174 BSF RULES

Reserves of any of the three
Services, the Auxiliary Air
Force, the Territorial Army, or
any Police Force in India or
Nepal State Army or any of the
Forces of a Foreign Country? If
so, state in which and the cause
of discharge. If you have served
in more than one of the above
named forces, or if you have
served the same Force in two or
more distinct periods, state the
cause of discharge separately in
each case.

(c) Do you desire your former
service in the India Armed
Forces or any Police Force to
count for the purpose of
calculation of Pay and/or
Pension, if admissible? If so, do
you agree to recovery being
effected of any gratuity you may
have received for your former
services is not more than thirty six
monthly installments from your
pay commencing from the date
of this enrolment and undertake
to refund to the Government
through such recoveries or
otherwise the above gratuity in
full within thirty six months of
the date of your present
enrolment?

12. Have you ever been arrested, prosecuted,
imprisoned, bound over, interned,
externed or otherwise dealt with under
any law in force in India or outside? If
so, state particulars.

[PAGE 176]
BSF RULES 175

13. Are you willing to be inoculated or reinoculated and vaccinated or revaccinated?

14. Are you willing to be enrolled as a
combatant in the Border Security Force?

15. Are you willing to go wherever ordered
by land, sea or air and not to allow any
caste or social usages to interfere with
the duties for which you are enrolled?

16. Are you willing to serve in the Border
Security Force until discharged, in
accordance with the conditions of service
as specified in Part-II of this form of
Enrolment, provided that the President
shall so long require your services?

17. Do you have any objections to take the
following oath or to make the following
affirmation at the time of your
attestation?

FORM OF OATH

I,...........................do swear in the name of God that
I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established and that I will, as in duty bound,
honestly and faithfully serve in the Border Security Force,
and go wherever ordered, by air, land or sea and that I will
observe and obey all commands of the President of the Union
of India and the commands of any officer set over me even
to the peril of my life.

FORM OF AFFIRMATION

I,.........................................................do solemnly,
sincerely and truly declare and affirm that I will bear true
faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law

[PAGE 177]
176 BSF RULES

established and that I will as in duty bound, honestly and
faithfully serve in the Border Security Force and go
wherever ordered by air, land or sea and that I will observe
and obey all commands of the President of the Union of
India and the commands of any officer set over me even to
the peril of my life.

CERTIFICATE

I,............................................do solemnly
declare that the answers furnished by me above are
true.

Place.........................
(______________________)*
Date.......................... Signature of Person Enrolled

Left Thumb impression of the person enrolled taken
in the presence of the enrolling officer.

___________Signature()
()
___________Name () of
Witness
___________Address ()

___________________()

___________________()

___________________()

___________________()

* Name in Block Letters

[PAGE 178]
BSF RULES 177

PART-II
CONDITIONS OF SERVICE

*1. On enrolment, you shall be subject to the Border
Security Force Act, 1968 and the Rules made thereunder.

*2. You are liable to be discharged during the first two
years of the service if you are not likely to become an efficient
member of the Force.

*3. You will also be liable to be discharged if the Central
Government decides to disband the Force or a portion of it.

* Amended vide S.O. 1040 dated 25-03-1996.

[PAGE 179]
178 BSF RULES

Certificate By The Person To Be Enrolled
I have understood the above conditions
and agree to abide by them.

( )
Signature of the person enrolled

Place....................................
Date.....................................

The above conditions have been read/explained to the
person being enrolled by me.

Place........................
Date.........................
( )
Signature of the Enrolling Officer

*Substituted vide SO 436 (E) dated 29.5.1990

[PAGE 180]
BSF RULES 179

PART- III
HEALTH CERTIFICATE

I do hereby certify that I have
examined______________ candidate for employment in the
Border Security Force. He fulfills medical standards laid
down for the Border Security Force and I cannot discover
that he has any disease, constitutional affliction or bodily
infirmity. His age according to his own statement
is______________________years and by appearance
_____________years.

Height____________________ Cms.
Chest (a) Maximum_________Cms.
(b) Minimum_________ Cms.

Signature of the Medical Officer

Place_________________
Date_________________

Designation

[PAGE 181]
180 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-II
(Rule - 39)
FORM OF DELAY REPORT

Confidential

No......................................

Unit address.......................

Date...................................

To
_______________________

Subject:- Ist (2nd), (3rd), (4th), etc., Eight day delay
report Pursuant to the BSF Act Section 59 and Rule 39.

1. No....................Rank..............Name.........................
2. Offence.....................................................................
3. Date of offence.............................................................
4. Date of offence was discovered....................................
5. Date of (open/close) arrest............................................
6. Date of release to open arrest/release without
Prejudice to rearrest (if...............................................
Not released, reasons)...................................................
7. Record of evidence made on.........................................
(If not recorded, reasons)
8. Application for trial made on........................................
9. Date due to be tried.......................................................
10. Reason for delay............................................................

(Commandant)
Copy to:-

(1) Inspector General (in the case of the (8th) and
subsequent reports).
(2) Director General (Special report in case the
accused is under close arrest for more than 3
months without a trial).

[PAGE 182]
BSF RULES 181

APPENDIX-III
(Rule - 40 (2))

Srl Date Name Name of Parti- Order of Sig. and Remarks
No of the the offi- cular the Com- date of
Accused cer or of the mandant the offi-
Sub Ord- requ- cer or
inate est or Sub Ord-
Offrs to repre- inate Offrs
whom senta- who conveys
reque- tion the orders
st or re- of the Commpresen- andant to
tation the accumade. sed.

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)

APPENDIX-IV
(Rule - 43)

Form for use at summary proceedings of under
officers and other enrolled person under Sec. 53 of the Border
Security Force Act.

OFFENCE REPORT ______________________________

Company ______________________
Serial No. ______________________
For week ending _________________
Last report submitted on___________

Charge against No..................................Rank..............................
Name..................................................................................... ..........

[PAGE 183]
182 BSF RULES

Place Offence Plea Names of Punishment Sig Rank Date of Remarks
and witness- awarded and Des- entry in
date es ignation conduct
of of officer sheet.
offence by whom
awarded
and date
of award.

(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)

Signature of Commandant
of the Battalion

Instructions

Col.1 In cases of absence without leave/desertion the “date of
offence” will be the first day of absence.

Col.2. The section and sub-section of the BSF Act under which
the charge is preferred will be inserted above the statement
of offence.

Col.3. An officer cannot deal summarily with a case in which
he is the sole prosecution witness.

Col.4. Must be completed strictly in accordance with the heading.

Note:- This will be prepared in duplicate. A copy alongwith a
precis of evidence where made shall be sent to the Deputy
Inspector General.

[PAGE 184]
BSF RULES 183

APPENDIX-V
(Rule - 52)

FORM OF APPLICATION FOR A SECURITY FORCE
COURT
Battalion/Unit
Station Dated............20...........

Application for a Security Force Court

Sir,

I have the honour to submit charge(s) against
No....................... Rank................Name................of
the..................Unit under my command, and request you to
accord/obtain sanction, of....................., that a Security Force Court
may be assembled for his trial at................ .

The case was investigated by (a) ....................................

A Court of Inquiry was held on (b) ...........date...............
at ...........................................(Station).

Presiding Officer...........................Rank, Name and Unit.
Members.....................................................................................................

The accused is now at................................ His general
character is................................(c). I enclose the following
documents (d).

1. Charge Sheet (......................................copies) (e).
2. Record or abstract of evidence (original) (f) and 5 copies.
3. Original exhibits (g).
4. Correspondence (g).
5. Statement as to character ( ) and the conduct sheet
of the accused (g).
6. List of witnesses for the prosecution and defence (with
their present addresses) (g).
7. List of Exhibits (h).
8. Statement by accused as to whether or not he desires to
have an officer assigned by the convening officer to
represent him at the trial (Rule 63) (h).

Signature of Commandant

[PAGE 185]
184 BSF RULES

(a) Here insert name of.......................................................

(i) Officer who investigated the charges.

(ii) Company/equivalent Commander who made
preliminary hearing into the case (Rule 45).

(iii) Officer who made the record of evidence (Rule 48).

(b) To be filled in if there has been a Court of Inquiry
respecting any matters connected with the charges;
otherwise to be struck out (Rule 60) (iii).

(c) To be filled in by the Commandant.

(d) Any items not applicable to be struck out.

(e) One copy each to Presiding Officer, Law Officer (if any),
members, Prosecutor and the accused.

(f) Original Record or abstract of Evidence to be sent to
Presiding Officer.

(g) 3,4,5 and 6 to be returned to the Commandant of the unit
of the accused with the notice of trial.

(h) 7 & 8 to be sent to the Presiding Officer.

[PAGE 186]
BSF RULES 185

APPENDIX-VI
(Rules - 53 (2))

CHARGE SHEET

The accused, No. ...........................................(if applicable)
Rank................................Name................................................Battalion/
Unit.....................................is charged with:-

DISOBEYING THE LAWFUL COMMAND OF HIS
SUPERIOR OFFICER

BSF Act
Sec. 21 (2)

in that he,

at...............................on..........................., disobeyed the lawful
command of his superior officer,
Rank...............Name.......................... of the same Battalion, to turn
out for Commandant’s parade, by not turning out.

Place...................
Date....................

A.B.
Commandant..........Bn BSF

*(To be tried by a General/Petty Security Force Court)

Place...................
Date....................

X.Y.
Inspector General/Dy. Inspector General
(or Staff Officer to IG/DIG Frontier)

* When the sanction is accorded for the trial of the grave
offences by Summary Security Force Court (BSF Act Sec.
74 (2)), a similar entry should be made on the charge sheet.

[PAGE 187]
186 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-VII
(Rule - 62)

Forms as to Security Force Court
Forms for Assembly of Security Force Court

GENERAL AND PETTY

Form of order for the Assembly of a General (or Petty)
Security Force Court under the Border Security Force Act 1968.

Orders by..........................................................

(Place..............................date..........................)
No.......................... The details of officers as mentioned
below will assemble at...........................
Rank...................... on the...............day of.............................
Name.................... for purpose of trying by a ......................
.............................. Security Force Court, the accused person
(persons) named in the margin (and such
Unit...................... other person or persons as may be brought
before them).*
The senior Officer to sit as Presiding Officer

MEMBERS ...............................................................
...............................................................
...............................................................
...............................................................

WAITING MEMBERS ...............................................................
...............................................................
...............................................................

LAW OFFICER
................................................................is appointed Law Officer.
INTERPRETER
.................................................................is appointed Interpreter.
PROSECUTOR
....................................................................is appointed Prosecutor.

*The accused will be warned, and all witnesses duly required
to attend.

[PAGE 188]
BSF RULES 187

The proceedings (of which only two copies are required)
will be forward to.............................................. Signed
this............................ day of.....................................

Convening Officer

* Any opinion of the Convening Officer with respect to the
composition of the Court (See Rule 61) should be added here,
thus:-

“In the opinion of the convening officer it is not practicable
to appoint officers of different battalions/units”.

“In the opinion of the convening officer, officers of equal
or superior rank to the accused are not available, having due regard
to the public service.”

* Add here any order regarding Counsel. (See Rule 62 (g)).

[PAGE 189]
188 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-VIII
(Rule - 106)

In exercise of the powers conferred on me by Section
105 of the Border Security Force Act 1968,
I..............................hereby order that...............................be
delivered/paid to..................(be confiscated/destroyed).

Signature
(Confirming Authority)
Date.................
Place................

[PAGE 190]
BSF RULES 189

APPENDIX-IX
(Rule - 106 (8))

The finding and sentence of the General/Petty
Security Force Court held
at................................(Place).............from...................... day
to.........................day for the trial of the accused...................
were promulgated to the accused by me
at........................(Place) on........................day
of.....................20 .

Extracts for battalion records have been taken/*No
record has been kept of the finding and sentence.

Signature
(Commandant)

Date..................
Place.................

* To be used in case of acquittal on all charges.

[PAGE 191]
190 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-X
(Rule - 163)

Warrants Under Section 121 and 125 of the

Border Security Force Act 1968

FORM ‘A’

Warrant of commitment for use when a prisoner is
sentenced to imprisonment for life (Sec. 121).

To

The Superintendent
of the (a)...........Prison.

Whereas at a General Security Force Court, held
at........... on the................day of.....................20 .
(No.......................................................
Rank....................Name.......................................Unit....................)
was convicted of (the offence to be briefly stated here, as
“desertion on active duty”, “correspondence with the enemy”
or as the case may be).

And whereas the said General Security Force Court
on the..................day of...................20 , passed the
following sentence upon the said (Name...............) that
is to say....................

(Sentence to be entered in full, but without signature).

And whereas the said sentence had been duly
confirmed by (b) as required by law (c).

This is to require and authorise you to receive the
said (Name.....................) into your custody in the said
prison as by law is required, together with this warrant,
until he shall be delivered over by you with the said
warrant to the proper authority and custody for the purpose
of undergoing the aforesaid sentence of imprisonment. The
aforesaid sentence has effected from the (d).

[PAGE 192]
BSF RULES 191

Given under my hand at...............this the................day
of......20 .

Signature (e)

(a) Enter name of civil prison.

(b) Name and description of confirming
authority.

(c) Add if necessary “with a remission
of..................”.

(d) Enter date on which the original sentence was
signed.

(e) Signature of Commandant of the prisoner or
other prescribed officer.

[PAGE 193]
192 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-X

(Rule - 163)

FORM “B”
Warrant of commitment for use ‘when a prisoner
is sentenced to imprisonment which is to be undergone
in a civil prison (BSF Act Section 121.)

To

The Superintendent
of the (a).............Prison.

Whereas at a (b)................Security Force Court held
at.................on the..........................................day
of.............................,20 . No...............Rank.............
Name.......................................... Unit...............................) was
duly convicted of....................(the offence to be briefly stated
here as ‘desertion’, ‘theft’ ‘receiving stolen goods’, ‘fraud’,
‘disobedience of lawful command’ or as the case may be).

And whereas the said (b).....................Security Force
Court on the.....................day of........................,20 , passed
the following sentence upon the said (Name.....................)
that is to say..............

(Sentence to be entered in full, but without signature).

And whereas the said sentence

(c) has been duly confirmed by (d) as required by
law (e)/is by law valid without confirmation.

This is to require and authorise you to receive
the said (Name.......................................................)
into your custody together with the warrant and there
carry the aforesaid sentence of imprisonment into
execution according to law. The sentence has effect
from the (f).......................................................................

[PAGE 194]
BSF RULES 193

Given under my hand at....................this
the................... day of..........................20 .

Signature (g)

(a) Enter name of civil prison.

(b) General, Petty or Summary.

(c) Strike out inapplicable words.

(d) Name and description of confirming
authority.

(e) Add if necessary ‘with a remission
of.................’.

(f) Enter date on which the original sentence was
signed.

(g) Signature of Commandant of prisoner or other
prescribed officer.

[PAGE 195]
194 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-X

(Rule - 163)

FORM ‘C’

Warrant for use when a sentence of
imprisonment for life is reduced by superior authority
to one of a shorter period (Section 125).

To
The Superintendent
of the (a)..................Prison.

Whereas (No...............Rank.........Name......................
(Late) of the..................unit is confined in the
(a)..............prison under a warrant issued by (b) in pursuance
of a sentence of (c)..................passed upon him by a
(d).............Security Force Court held at.........on.............. and
whereas (e)............................. ............has, in the exercise of
the power conferred upon him by the Border Security Force
Act, passed the following order regarding the aforesaid
sentence; that is to say:-
(f)........................................................................................

..........................................................................................

...........................................................................................

This is to require and authorise you to keep the said
(name)...................in your custody together with this
warrant in the said prison as by law is required until he
shall be delivered over by you with the said warrant to the
proper authority and custody, for the purpose of his
undergoing the punishment of imprisonment for life under
the said order. And this is further to require and authorise
you to return to me the original warrant of commitment in
lieu where of this warrant is issued.

* The period of such imprisonment will reckon from
the (g).

[PAGE 196]
BSF RULES 195

Given under my hand at.......................................this
the...............day of......................................20 .

Signature (h)

(a) Enter name of civil prison.

(b) Enter name or designation of officer who
singed original warrant.

(c) Enter original sentence (if this was reduced
by the confirming officer or other superior
authority the sentence should be entered
thus:- “Life Imprisonment reduced by
confirming officer to 10 years”.

(d) General.

(e) Name and designation of authority varying
the sentence.

(f) Order to be sent out in full.

(g) Enter date on which original sentence was
signed.

(h) Signature of prescribed officer.

[PAGE 197]
196 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-X

(Rule - 163)

FORM ‘D’
Warrant for use when prisoner is to be delivered into
force custody
To
The Superintendent
of the (a)..................Prison.

Whereas (No...............Rank.........Name......................
(Late) of the..................unit is confined in the
(a)..............prison under a warrant issued by (b) in pursuance
of a sentence of (c)..................passed upon him by a
(d).............Security Force Court held at............on............. and
whereas (e)........................ ............has, in exercise of the
powers conferred upon him by the Border Security Force
Act passed the following order regarding the aforesaid
sentence; that is to say-

(f)........................................................................................
This is to require and authorise you to deliver
forthwith the said (name) in your custody to the officer or
subordinate officer bringing this warrant.
Given under my hand at.................this
the......................... day of......................20 .
Signature (g)
(a) Enter name of civil prison.
(b) Enter name or designation of officer who
signed original warrant.
(c) Enter original sentence (if this was reduced by
the confirming officer or other superior
authority the sentence should be entered thus:-
“2years rigorous imprisonment reduced by
confirming officer to 1 year”.
(d) General, Petty or Summary.
(e) Name and designation of authority issuing the
order.
(f) Order to be set out in full.
(g) Signature of prescribed officer.

[PAGE 198]
BSF RULES 197

APPENDIX-XI

(Rule - 164 (1))

FORM ‘A’
Warrant committing to civil prison custody
a person sentenced to death

To

The Superintendent
of the (a)..................Prison.

Whereas a (b).........................Security Force Court
held at.............on the.............day of..........20 ,
(No..........Rank......... Name.....................) of the................unit
was convicted of.............. (Offence to be briefly stated).

And whereas the said (b).............Security Force Court
on the................day of.................20 , passed sentence of
death by being hanged, on the said.

NAME:-

and the said sentence of death has been confirmed by the
Central Government.

This is to require and authorise you to receive the
said (Name)..............into your custody and to carry out the
sentence of death on.................... .

Given under my hand at..................this
the........................ day 20 .

Signature (c)

(a) Enter name of civil prison.
(b) General.
(c) Signature of the Director General.

[PAGE 199]
198 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-XI

(Rule - 164 (2))

FORM ‘B’
Warrant to obtain person sentenced to death from civil
custody in order to carry out such sentence

To

The Superintendent
of the (a)..................Prison.

Whereas No..........Rank..........Name...................(late)
of the...................unit having been sentenced to suffer death
on the.........day of............20 , by a (b).............Security
Force Court held at.............is held in the said prison under a
warrant by (c).

And whereas, the said sentences having been duly
confirmed by (d).............as by Law required, an order to
carryout the said sentence has been issued to me (c)......(Name
& Rank)...............

This is to require and authorise you to deliver forthwith the said (Name).......................to the Officer/Subordinate
Officer/Under Officer bringing this warrant.

Given under my hand at.........................................this
day of.....................20 .

Signature (f)

(a) Enter name of civil prison.
(b) General.
(c) Enter name or designation of officer who
signed original warrant.
(d) Name and description of confirming
authority.
(e) Name and designation of the officer to whom
the order is issued.
(f) Signature of the officer by whom the order is
issued.

[PAGE 200]
BSF RULES 199

APPENDIX-XI

(Rule - 164 (2))

FORM ‘C’
Warrant to carry out sentence of death

To

The Deputy Inspector, General
...................................

Whereas a (a).............Security Force Court held
at............. on the.............day of........................20 .

(No.......................Rank...................Name.....................................
of the.............................Battalion/Unit was convicted
of.................... (Offence to be briefly stated).

And whereas the said
(a)....................................Security Force Court on
the......................day of...............................20 . Passed
sentence of death by being shot on the said (Name)...........
and the sentence of death has been confirmed by the Central
Government.

This is to require and authorise you to carryout the
sentence of death on..................................... .

Given under my hand at.........................this
the.................. day of.....................20 .

Signature (b)

(a) General.

(b) Signature of the Director General.

[PAGE 201]
200 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-XII
(Rule - 165)
FORM ‘A’
Warrant for use when the sentence of a person under
sentence of death and committed to custody in a civil
prison is commuted to a sentence of imprisonment for life.

The Superintendent of the
(a).....................Prison.

Whereas No.............Rank..................Name (late) of the................
Unit is held in the (a)......................Prison under a warrant issued
by (b).....................in pursuance of a sentence of death passed upon
him by (c)...........................Security Force Court held at................
on........and whereas (d).......has, in exercise of the powers conferred
upon him by the Border Security Force Act, passed the following
order regarding the aforesaid sentence: that is to say (e)....................

This is to require and authorise you to keep the said
(Name.......................) in your custody together with this warrant
in the said prison as by law is required until he shall be delivered
over by you with the said warrant to the proper authority and
custody for the purpose of this undergoing the punishment of
imprisonment for life, under the said order. And this is further to
require and authorise you to return to me the original warrant of
commitment in lieu where-of this warrant is issued. This period
of such imprisonment for life will reckon from the (f).....................

Given under my hand at.........this the.......day
of.......20 .

Signature (g)

(a) Enter name of civil prison.
(b) Enter name or designation of the officer who
signed original warrant.
(c) General.
(d) Name and designation of authority commuting
the sentence.
(e) Order to be set out in full.
(f) Enter date on which original sentence was signed.
(g) Signature of Commandant.

[PAGE 202]
BSF RULES 201

APPENDIX-XII

(Rule - 165)

FORM ‘B’
Warrant for use when the sentence of a person under
sentence of death and committed to custody in a civil prison
is commuted to a sentence of imprisonment to be served in
the same prison.

To
The Superintendent of the (a)..........Prison.

Whereas (No........Rank.........Name.............(late) of the...........Unit
is held in the (a) Prison under a warrant issued by (b)........in pursuance
of a sentence of death passed upon him by a (c)......... Security Force
Court held at..........on........., and whereas (d)........ has in exercise of
the powers conferred upon him by the Border Security Force Act,
passed the following order regarding the aforesaid sentence, that is
to say:- (e)..........

This is to require and authorise you to keep the said
(Name)............in your custody together with this warrant, and there
to carry into execution the punishment of imprisonment under the
said order according to law.

And this is further to require and authorise you to return to
me the original warrant of commitment in lieu where-of this warrant
is issued. This period of such imprisonment will reckon from the
(f)........... .

Given under my hand at......this........the.......day of.....20 .

Signature (g)

(a) Enter name of civil prison.
(b) Enter name or designation of officer who signed
original warrant.
(c) General.
(d) Name and designation of authority commuting the
sentence.
(e) Order to be set out in full.
(f) Enter date on which original sentence signed.
(g) Signature of Commandant.

[PAGE 203]
202 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-XII

(Rule - 165)

FORM ‘C’
Warrant for use when a person who, after having been
sentenced to death has been committed to custody in a
civil prison is to be delivered into Force custody for a
purpose other than carrying out the sentence of death.

To

The Superintendent of the (a)..........Prison. Whereas
(No. .......Rank..........Name.............(late) of the..........Unit is
held in the (a)..............Prison under a warrant issued by
(b)..............in pursuance to a sentence of death passed upon
him by a (c)........ Security Force Court held
at..........on..........and whereas (d)......... has in exercise of
powers conferred upon by the Border Security Force Act,
passed the following order regarding the aforesaid sentence;
that is to say (e)........................................................... .

This is to require and authorise you to forthwith
deliver the said (name)...................to the officer/subordinate
officer or under officer bringing this warrant.

Given under my hand at..........................this
the................ day of.........................20 .

Signature (f)

(a) Enter name of civil prison.

(b) Enter name or designation of officer who
signed original warrant.

(c) General.

(d) Name and designation of authority issuing
order.

(e) Order to be set out in full.

(f) Signature of Commandant.

[PAGE 204]
BSF RULES 203

APPENDIX-XII

(Rule - 165)

FORM ‘D’
Warrant for when a prisoner is pardoned or his trial set
aside, or when the whole sentence or the unexpired portion
is remitted (Section 125).

To
The Superintendent
of the (a)..................Prison.

Whereas (No. ............Rank............Name....................)of the...........
Unit is confined in the (a).........Prison under a warrant issued by
(b)................in pursuance of a sentence of (c)............passed upon
him by a (d)...........Security Force Court held at.........on and
whereas (e).............has in exercise of the powers conferred upon
him by the Border Security Force Act, passed the following order
regarding the aforesaid sentence, that is to say (f)....................

This is to require and authorise you to forthwith discharge
the said (Name)................from your custody unless he is liable to
be detained for some other cause, and for your so discharging
him this shall be your sufficient warrant.

Given under my hand at......this the............day of... ...20 .

Signature (g)

(a) Enter name of civil prison.
(b) Enter name or designation of officer who signed
original warrant.
(c) Enter original sentence (if this was reduced by
the confirming officer or other superior authority
the sentence should be entered thus : 2 years
rigorous imprisonment reduced by confirming
officer to 1 year).
(d) General, petty and (or) Summary.
(e) Name and designation of authority pardoning
prisoner, mitigating sentence or setting aside trial.
(f) Order to be set aside in full.
(g) Signature of prescribed officer.

[PAGE 205]
204 BSF RULES

APPENDIX-XIII

(Rule 174 (1) (a) (iii))

REPORT ON UNNATURAL DEATH

1. Place of death, or the place where dead body
was found (give details).

2. Date and time at which information of death
was received.

3. Name and description of two or more persons
who identify the dead body.

4. Name and particulars of the deceased and his
status.

5. Condition of clothes worn by deceased.

Note:- In case, examination by Doctor is awaited, above
details should be collected without removing the clothes etc.
of the deceased, the other details should be completed after
the Doctor’s examination.

6. Condition of limbs, eyes and mouth.

7. Expression of face.

8. Marks of struggle on the dead body if any,
injuries and abrasions should be recorded
showing their size and location.

Note:- Depth of injury should be recorded but injuries should
not be touched. If examination by Doctor is awaited the above
information should be recorded after his examination.

9. Whether blood is fluid or coagulated. The
place from which it came out and its quantity.

10. By which means, weapon or instrument, the
injury or marks of struggle appear to have
been caused.

[PAGE 206]
BSF RULES 205

11. Was any rope tied around the neck or is
there any marks of it being tied by anything.

12. Was the rope or any other thing used to
strangle or hang dead body, was it strong
enough to sustain the weight and whether
its other end was tied to anything.

13. Was any external article like grass etc.
sticking to hairs or held in his hands or
sticking to any other part of the body.

14. Is the dead body that of a strong and well
built man or is it that of a weak or old man.

15. Is the dead body strong or weak or is it in
decomposed state.

16. Length of the dead body from head to feet.

17. Identification marks and location and
appearance of the wounds.

18. Apparent cause of death.

19. Is there any rumour or other circumstances
showing that it is a case of suicide.

Details of articles found on the dead body or lying near it.

20. Those found on the dead body (A slip will be
affixed on each article which will be stamped).

21. Those found lying near the dead body (a slip
duly stamped will be affixed on each article).

[PAGE 207]
206 BSF RULES

Description of seal

22. Map of the place where the dead body was found.

Brief history of the case.

Signature of two or
more respectable
witnesses of the
locality in whose
Presence investigation
was carried out.

Place.....................

Signature of the officer
Investigating the case
Date.......................
Name.......................

Rank........................

[PAGE 208]
BSF RULES 207

APPENDIX-XIV

(Rule 180)

PART-I
FORM-I

Form for use at summary trials of or below the rank
of Subordinate Officer (Under Section 55 of the Act).

Accused..........................................................................
Rank & Name................................................................
Unit................................................................................

When the authority dealing summarily with the case
decides (with the written consent of the accused) to dispense
with the attendance of witnesses.

Question to accused:-

1. Have you received a copy of the charge
sheet and record or abstract of evidence?
Answer:
2. Have you had sufficient time to prepare
your defence?
Answer:
*3. The charge sheet is read. Are you guilty
or not guilty of the charge (s) against you
which you have heard/read?
Answer:
4. Do you wish to make a statement?
Answer:

If the accused desires to make a
statement he should do so now. If
at the conclusion of the hearing the
authority dealing summarily with the
case considers that the charge should
not be dismissed, he is to examine the
accused’s record of service or conduct
sheet. If the authority dealing summarily

[PAGE 209]
208 BSF RULES

with the case proposes to award a punishment other than a reprimand, severe
reprimand or penal deductions, in the
case of a subordinate officer, he shall
put the following question to the accused.

5. Do you elect to be tried by Security
Force Court or will you accept my award?
Answer:

Finding.....................................................................................................
Award.......................................................................................................
Station......................................................................................................
Date..........................................................................................................
..................................................................................................................

Note:- Oral statement of the accused made in answer to question
4 will not be recorded. If the accused has submitted a written
statement such statement is only to be forwarded with or attached
to this form when a copy of the Record or Abstract of evidence is
also required to be so forwarded or attached. This form will be
kept with Confidential Character Roll of the Subordinate Officer.

* If the accused pleads ‘Not Guilty’ to the charge, then
after question No. 3 record the following :-

“ The record of Evidence/AOE is read within the hearing
of the accused.”

[PAGE 210]
BSF RULES 209

APPENDIX-XIV

(Rule 180)
Part -I
FORM - II

Form for use at summary trials of or below the rank of
Subordinate Officer (Under Section 55 of the Act).

Accused .............................................................................................
Rank and Name .................................................................................
Unit ....................................................................................................

When the authority dealing summarily with the case does
not decide to dispense with the attendance of witnesses or when
the accused requires their attendance.

Question to accused :-

1. Have you received a copy of the charge sheet
and the record or abstract of evidence?
Answer :

2. Have you had sufficient time to prepare your defence?
Answer :

3. Are you guilty or not guilty of the charges against
you which you have heard/read?
The witnesses give their evidence,
accused being permitted to cross-examine.
Answer :

4. Do you wish to make a statement?
Answer :

5. Do you desire to call any witness?
Answer :

The accused makes a statement and his
witnesses give evidence.

[PAGE 211]
210 BSF RULES

If at the conclusion of the hearing,
the authority dealing summarily with the
case considers that the charge should not
be dismissed, he is to examine the accused’s
record of service or conduct sheet.

If the authority dealing summarily with the
case proposes to award a punishment other
than a reprimand, severe reprimand or penal
deduction in the case of subordinate officer,
he shall put the following question to the accused :-

6. Do you elect to be tried by Security Force
Court or will you accept my award ?

Answer :

Finding ...............................................................................................

Award ................................................................................................

Station ................................................................................................

Date ....................................................................................................

....................................................................................................................

Note :- Oral statement of the accused made in answer to
question 4 will not be recorded. If the accused has submitted
a written statement, such statement is only to be forwarded
with or attached to this form. When a copy of the Record or
Abstract of evidence is also required to be so forwarded or
attached, this Form will also required to be so forwarded or
attached. This form will be kept with Confidential Character
Roll of the Subordinate Officer.

[PAGE 212]
BSF RULES 211
CRIMINAL COURTS AND BORDER
SECURITY FORCE COURT
(ADJUSTMENT OF JURISDICTION) RULES 1969

SO 3477. Inexercise of the powers conferred by clause

(k) of Sub- Section (2) of section 141 of the Border Security
Force Act. 1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby
makes the following rules namely :-

1. Short title.- These rules may be called the Criminal
Courts and Border Security Force Court (Adjustment of jurisdiction) Rules 1969.

? Definitions.- In these rules unless the context otherwise
required.

(i) “Aet” means the Border Security Force Act 1968
(47 of 1968);

(ii) “Commandant” in relation to a person subject
to the Act means the officer Commanding the
unit or detachment to which such person
belongs or attached;

(ii) “Competent authority” means the Director
General, Inspector General or a Dy. Inspector
General of the Border Security Force:

(iv) Words and expressions used in these rules and
not defined but defined in the Act, shall have
the meaning respectively assigned to them in
the Act.

3. Trial of person subject to the Act.- Where a person
subject to the Act. is brought before a Magistrate and charved
with an offence for which he is liable to be tried by a Border
Security Force Court. such magistrate shall not proceed to
try such person or to inquire with a view to his Commitment
for trial by the Court of Sessions or the High Court for any
offence triable by such Court, unless :-

[PAGE 213]
212 BSF RULES

(a) he is of opinion, for reasons to be recorded in
writing that he should sa proceed without
being moved thereto by the competent
authority: or

{b) he is moved thereta by such authority.

4, Notice by Magistrate.- Before proceeding under
clause (a) rule 3, the Magistrate shall give written notice to

the Commandant of the accused and until the expiry of a

period of :-

(i) Three weeks in the case of a notice given to a
Commandant in command of a unit or
detachment located in any of the following
areas, that is ta say :-

(a) State of Nagaland,

(b) Mizohill, Garo Hill, Khasi and Jaintia Hill
and North Cachar Hill, Districts of
Assam, or

(ii) ten days in the case ofa notice given to any other
Commandant in command of a unit or
detachment located elsewhere in India, from
the date of the service of such notice shall
not:

; (a) convict or acquit the accused under section 243
or section 245 or section 247 or section 248
of the code of Criminal Procedure 1898 (5 of
1898) or hear him in his defence under section
244 of the said code: or

(b) frame in writing a charge against the accused
under section 254 of the said code: or

{c) make an order committing the accused for trial
by the High Court or the Court of Sessions
under section 213 of the said Code: or

[PAGE 214]
BSF RULES 213
(d) transfer the case for inquiry or trial under section
192 of the said code.
5. Procedure on notice to the Magistrate.- Where
within the period mentioned in rule 4 above, or at any time
thereafier before the Magistrate has done any act or made
any order referred to in that rule, the Commandant of the
accused or the competent authority, as the case may be, gives
notice to the Magistrate that in the opinion of such authority.
the accused should be tried by a Border Security Farce Court,
the Magistrate shall stay proceedings and if the accused is
in his power or under his control, shall deliver him with the
statement prescribed in sub-section (1) of section 549 of
the code of Criminal Procedure 1898 (5 of 1898) to the
authority specified in the said sub-section.
6, Procedure on notice to Magistrate before
Commencement of trial.- Where a Magistrate has been
moved by the competent authority under clause (b) of rule
3. and the Commandant of the accused or the competent
authority as the case may be, subsequently gives notice to
such Magistrate that in the opinion of such authority the
accused should be tried by a Border Security Force Court,
such Magistrate, if he has not before receiving such notice
done any act or made any order referred to in rule 4 shall
stay proceedings, and, if the aceused is in his power or under
his control, shall in the like manner deliver him, with the
statement prescribed in sub-section (1) of section 349 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), to the
authority specified in the said sub-section.
7, Intimation regarding trial of accused.- (1)
When an accused has been delivered by the Magistrate under
rule 5 or 6, the Commandant of the accused or the competent
authority, as the case may be, shall, as soon as may be, inform
the Magistrate whether the accused has been tried by a
Security Force Court or other effectual proceedings has been
taken or ordered to be taken against him.

[PAGE 215]
214 BSF RULES
Sa

(2) When the Magistrate has been informed under
rule (1) that the accused has not been tried or other effectual
proceedings have not been taken or not ordered to be taken
against him the Magistrate shall report the circumstances to
the State Government, which may, in consultation with the
Central Government, take appropriate steps to ensure that
the accused person is dealt with in accordance with law.
8. Reference to Central Government for
determination of Court of trial.- Not withstanding anything
contained in the foregoing rule where it comes to the notice
of a Magistrate that a person subject to the Act committed
an offence. proceedings in respect of which ought to he
instituted before him and that the presence of such person
cannot be procured except through the Commandant or the
competent authority the Magistrate may, by a written notice,
require the Commandant of such person either to deliver
such person to a Magistrate to be named in the said notice
for being proceeded against according to law, or to stay the
proceedings against such person before the Border Security
Force Court, if since instituted, and to make a reference to
the Central Government for determination as to the Court
before which proceedings should be instituted.
9. Delivery of accused to the Magistrate Where a
person subject te the Act has committed an offence which.
ii the opinion of competent authority ought to be tried by a
Magistrate in accordance with the civil law in foree or where
the Central Government on a reference mentioned in rule 8.
decides that the proceedings against such person should be
instituted before a Magistrate, the Commandant of such
person shall, after giving a written notice to the Magistrate
concerned deliver such person under proper escort to that
Magistrate,

(No, F 31/4/69-BSF-1)

[PAGE 216]
BSF RULES 215
BSF (DEDUCTIONS FROM PAY AND
ALLOWANCES) RULES 1978

SO 76 (E) - In exercise of the powers conferred by

sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 141 of the Border Security
Force Act 1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby
makes the following rules, namely:-
1. Short title application and commencement.-
(lL) These rules may be called the BSF (Deductions
from Pay and Allowances) Rules, 1978,

(2) These rules shall apply to all persons subject to

the Act.

(3) They shall come into force on the date of their

publication in the official Gazette.
2. —_ Definitions.- In these rules unless the context otherwise
required,

(a) “Act” means the BSF Act, 1968 (47 of 1968)

(b) Words and expressions used herein and not
defined in these rules but defined in the Act
shall have the meaning assigned to them in
the Act.

3. Deductions from pay and allowances of Officers.-
The following deductions may be made from the Pay and
allowances of an officer that is to say:

{a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every
day he absents himself without leave, unless
a stisfactory explanation had been given and
accepted by the IG under whom he, for the
time being, serving:

(b) any sum required to make good the pay of any
person subject to this Act which the officer
has unlawfully retained or unlawfully refused
to pay:

[PAGE 217]
216 BSF RULES

(e} any sum required to be paidas fine imposed by a
criminal court or a Security Force Court;

(d) any sum required to make good any loss, damage
or destruction of public property or property
belonging to the Force which, after due
investigation, appears to the Inspector
General under whom the officer is for time
being serving. to have been occasioned by
wrongful act or negligence on the part of the
officers:

(e) all pay and allowances forfeited by an order of
the Central Government if the Officer is
found by a court of inquiry Constituted by
the Director General. BSF in this behalf, to
have deserted to the enemy, or while in
enemy's hands, to have served with or under
the orders of enemy, or in any manner to have
aided the enemy or to have allowed himself
to be taken prisoner by the enemy through
want of due precaution or through
disobedience of orders, wilful neglect of duty
or having been taken prisoner by the enemy,
to have failed to rejoin his service when it
was possible to do soz

(f) any sum required by an order of the Central
Government to be paid for the maintenance
of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate
child or step child or towards the cost of any
relief given by the said Government to the
said wife or child.

4, Deductions from the pay and allowances of persons
other than officer.- Subject to the provisions of rule 6, the
following deductions may be made from the pay and
allowances of persons subject to the Act. other than an officer,
that ts to say:-

(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence

either on desertions or without leave, or as a

[PAGE 218]
BSF RULES 217
prisoner of war, and for every dav of
imprisonment awarded by a criminal court.
a Security Force Court or an officer
exercising authority under Sec 53 of the Act:

(b) all pay and allowances for every day between
the date of his recovery from the enemy and
his dismissal from the service in consequence
of his conduet when being taken prisoner, by
or while in the hands of the enemy:

(ce) anysom sequiediom ake qood the pay ofany person
Subject in this Act which he hes unlaw filly
metiamed orunilaw filly refused to pay;

ii] any sum required te make good such
com pensation forany expenses, oas,dam age
or destruction caused by him tm the C ental
Govemm entorto any buikiing or propery
orany private fund of the Force, asm ay be
aw armed by his Comm andant;

2} any Sum tequited to be paid as finé in posed by
a.C im inalCourta Secunty Femme Courter
an. officer exermising authonty underSéctinn
SSA atthe A cy

(f) any sum: tmauired by an omer of the Canteal

' Govermm entto be paid form aintenance of
his w ite, lagiim ate or iWegitm ate child or
si@p-child or tow amis the cost of any rmelef
qiven by the said G avemm entio the said w ie
orchild.

5, Computation of time of absence or imprisonment

for the purpose of clause (a) of Rule 4.- (1) No person
shall be treated as absent or under imprisonment for a day
unless the absence or imprisonment has lasted, whether

; wholly in one day or partly in one day and partly in another.
for six consecutive hours or upward:

(2) any absence or imprisonment for less than a day

may be reckoned as absence or imprisonment for a day if

[PAGE 219]
218 BSF RULES
such absence or imprisonment prevented the absentee from
fulfilling any duty as a member of the Force which was
thereby thrown upon some other member.

6. Limit of certain deductions.- The total deductions
from the Pay and allowance of a person made under clauses
(c) to (f) of rule 4 shall not except where he is sentenced to
dismissal, exceed in any one month, one half of his pay and
allowance for that month.

7. Deductions from public money due to a person.-
Any sum authorised by these rules to be deducted from the
pay and allowances of any person may, without prejudice to
any other mode of recovering the same, be deducted from
any public money due to him other than a pension.

8. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during the
inquiry into his conduct.- Whether the conduct of any
person subject to the Act when being taken prisoner by. or
while in hands of the enemy, is to be inquired into under the
Act or any law, the Central Government or the Director
General or any officer authorised by the Director General
may order that the whole or any part of the pay and allowance
of such person shall be withheld pending the result of such
inquiry.

9. Provision for dependents of prisoner of war from
remitted deductions.- In the case of person subject to the
Act, being prisoner of war, whose pay and allowances have
been forfeited under clause (e) of rule 3 or clause (a) of rule
4, but in respect of whom a remission has been made under
rule 13. it shall be lawful for proper provision to be made by
the Cenrtal Government out of such pay and allowances for
any dependents of such persons, and any such remission shall,
in that case, be deemed to apply only to the balance remaining
thereafter of such pay and allowances.

10. Provision for dependents of war from his pay and
allowances.- It shall be lawful for proper provision to be

[PAGE 220]
BSF RULES 219
ee ae
made by the Central Government (or by the Director General
When so authorised by the Central Government) for any
dependents orany person subject to the Act who isa prisoner

of war or is missing. out of his pay and allowances.
ll. Period during which a person is deemed to be
prisoner of war.- For the purposes of rule 9 and 10, and
person shall be deemed to continue to be a prisoner of war
until the conclusion of any inquiry into his conduct referred
to in rule 8, and if he is dismissed from the service. in
consequence of such conduct, until the date of such dismissal.
i2. Authority competent to order deductions.- The
following shall be the authorities competent to order
deductions from pay and allowances under these rule
namely:-

(1) Commandants, in the case of subordinate olficers
and enrolled persons;
* (2) Director General, in the case of officers.

13. Remission of deductions.- Any authority superior to
the one awarding any deductions under these rules shall be
competent to remit the whole or part of the said deductions.
14. Powers to be exercised by a superior officer or
authority.- Any power conferred by the provisions of these
rules on an officer may be exercised by an officer or authority
superior in command to the first mentioned officer,

15, Transitory provisions.- Any rule or order applicable ;
to the members of the Force on the date of commencement

of these rules shall, unless it is repugnant ta these rules,

continue to apply unless and until itis abrogated or modified

by the Central Government or any other competent authority.

(F No. 1/20/77-CLO/BSF)
se
* Substituted vide §.0. 3/90 dated 2 Nov, 78.

[PAGE 221]
220 BSF RULES
CRIMINAL PROCEDURE CODE, 1898
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
(Border Security (1) Section)

ORDER

New Delhi, the 22nd July 1969

8. O. 3028 Whereas the Central Government is of

opinion that for the purposes specified in clause (i) and clause
(i) of Sub-Section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security
Force Act, 1968 (47 of 1968).

(a) an officer of the rank corresponding to that of
the lowest rank of member of the Force is
empowered under the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), to exercise and
discharge the powers and duties under
sections 47, 48, 49, 51.53, 54, 149, 150, 151
and 152 of the of the said Code;

(b) an officer ofa rank corresponding to lower than
that of officer and subordinate officers of the
Force is empowered under the said Code to
exercise and discharge the powers and duties
under section 55, 102. 103 and 131 thereof:

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by

sub section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security Force
Act 1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby directs
that for the purposes referred to in clause (i) and clause (ii)
of that sub section.

(a) any member of the Force may, within the local
limits of the areas specified in the Schedule
hereto annexed exercise and discharge the
powers and duties under section 47, 48, 49.
31,53, 54, 149, 150, 151 and 152 of the code
of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).

[PAGE 222]
BEE RULES 221

(b) any officer or subordinate officers of the Force
may, within the local limits. of the areas
specified in the said schedule. exercise and
discharge the power and duties under section
55. 102, 103 and 131 of the said code.

The Schedule

(1) The whole of the area comprised in the Union
Territories of Manipur and Tripura.

(2) So much of the area comprised within a belt of
eighty kilometers in the State of Gujarat, fifty
kilometres in the State of Rajasthan and
fifteen kilometres in the State of Punjab, West
Bengal and Assam, running along the borders of India.

(F 31-8-69 BSF - 1)

[PAGE 223]
222 BSF RULES
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 25th February, 1997
8.0, 592 - In exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 74 of the Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of
1968), the Central Government hereby declares the post
mentioned in column 2 of the Table below as equivalent to
the post mentioned in the corresponding entry in column |
of the said Table, namely:-
TABLE
: Post and rank in Post and rank inthe Border t h c
police Security Force
| 2
Superintendent of Police Deputy Commandant
[No. 1/13/96-CLO/BSF]
5 K SWAML, Dy. Secy.

[PAGE 224]
BSF RULES 223
GAZETTE OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
NEW DELHI
Dated 25th June 1973

8. O, 353 (E) Whereas the Central Government is of
opinion that for the purposes specified in clause (i) and clause
(ii) of sub section (1) of Section 139 of the Border Security
Force Act. 1968 (47 of 1968):-

fa) an officer of the tank Comesponding w thatat

the lowestof member of the Fare is
om pow ered under the Code af Crm inal
Pinceduze, 1898 6 of 1998), to-exercise the
powers and dischame the duties undar
sections 47,48,48,51,.53,,50,149; 150,151
anc i5? of the said Code;

to} an-oficer ofa rank cemesoonding tm or low er

than thatof officers and subortiinate officers
of the Force is em pow ered under the said
Code tf exercise the pow ers and discharge
the duties undersections 55,102,103 and 131
theren tf;

N ow) theretprg, n exercise of the pow ersconioned by
sub section (1) af sention 139 ofthe Bomer Security Fome
AohlO6s (47 of 1968), tec enttalc ovemm enthereby directs
that forthe purposes refered tm in clausé (i) and clause (1)
of that sup-section >

ia) any mem berofthe Force m ay, within the loral
. iin ite of the areas specified in the Schedule

herem annexed, exercise the paw ers and
Gischarje the duties under sections 47, 48,
49,51,53, 54, 149,150,151 and 152 of the
fode of Crm inal Proceduye, 1898 [(9) of
1H98 |;

[PAGE 225]
224 BSF RULES
(b) any officer or subordinate officers of the Force

may, within the local limits, of the areas
specified in the said schedule. exercise the
powers and discharge the duties under
sections 55, 102. 103 and 131 of the said
Code.

The Schedule

The whole of the area comprised in the States of

Meghalaya and Nagaland and in the Union Territory of

Mizoram.

(NO. F 4(13)/73-CLO/BSF/PERS-I
C GSOMIAH. Jt. Secy.

[PAGE 226]
BSF RULES 225
COMPARATIVE CHART OF RELEVANT
PROVISIONS RELATING TO GRANT OF POWERS
TO BSF PERSONNEL UNDER CrPC 1898 (OLD
ACT) AND CrPC 1973 (NEW ACT)

8. No, Powers Sectionunder Section

under
CrPC 1898 GrPC 1973

1. Relating to arrest S 54 S41 (1)

§ 150 5 150

$151 S151

$55 S41 (2)
2. Relating to search S47 S47 (1)

and seizure 5 48 847 (2)

§ 49 § 47 (3)

55] $31 (1

$33 852

5 102 8 LOO
. and 103
3. Other powers 5 131 S131

5 149 S 149

5S 152 8 152

[PAGE 227]
226 BSF RULES
CUSTOMS ACT, 1962

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Department of Revenue & Insurance)

New Delhi, the 20th Dec *69

NOTIFICATION CUSTOMS

§.0. No, 4941 In exercise of the powers conferred by section

6 of the Customs Act. 1962 (52 of 1962), the Central Government

hereby entrusts to the Officers of the Border Security Force, posted

in the States of Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Rajasthan, Gujarat,

West Bengal and Assam and the Union ‘Territory of Tripura,

mentioned in Column 2 of the Table below, the functions of an

officer of Customs specified in the corresponding entry in Column
of the said Table and directs that each such officer of the Border

Security Force shall exercise the fictions of an officer of Customs

within the local limits of his jurisdiction,

Sl. Designation of Officer Functions under the pro-

Na, visions of the Customs

Act, 1962

1. All Commandants. Deputy Functions undersections 100
Commandants and Asstt. to 104 (both inclusive), 106,
Commandants 107, 109 and 110 and also

under sections 105 & 108 in
places where no officer of
customs of the rank of
Superintendent of Customs
and Central Excise or above
is stationed,

2. All Subedar Majors. Functions under Sections
Subedars and Sub- L100 to 104 (both inclusive),
Inspectors. LO6, 107, 109 & 110.

5. All Head Constables, Functions under Sections
Naiks 100, 102, 106 & 110.

(P.N. KAPOOR)
Under Seeretary to the Govt. of India

[PAGE 228]
BSF RULES 227
CLO letter No. 5/7/86-CL.O/BSF dtd. 5 June 86.
POWERS UNDER CUSTOMS ACT
Vide notification SO No. 4941 dated 20.12.69 certain
powers under Customs Act were conferred on BSF Personnel.
The said powers could be exercised by BSF personnel while
posted in specified States. This notification has since been
superseded by another notification vide which powers under
Customs Act can now be exercised by BSF personnel at all
places of their positings within the areas of their local
jurisdiction. The new notification is reproduced below:-
“In exercise of the powers conferred by section 6 of
the Customs Act, 1962 (32 of 1962), and in supersession of
the notification of the Government of India in the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue & Insurance) No. 163-
Customs, dated the 20th December, 1969, the Central
Government hereby entrusts to the officers of the Border
Security Force mentioned in column 2 of the Table below,
wherever posted, the functions of an officer of Customs
specified in the corresponding entry in column 3 of the said
Table and directs that each such officer shall exercise the
functions of an officer of customs within the local limits of
his jurisdiction,
Sl. Designation of Officer Functions under the pro-
No. visions of the Customs
Act, 1962
}. All Commandants. Deputy (1) Funetions under
Commandants and Asstt. sections 100 to 104 (both
Commandants inclusive), 106, 107, 109
and 110 and.
(2) Functions under
Sections 105 and 108 in
places where no officer of
customs of the rank of
Superintendent af
Customs é& Central Excise
or above is stationed,

[PAGE 229]
228 BSF RULES

2. All Subedar Majors, Functions under Sections

Subedars & Sub Inspectors. 100 to 104 (both inclusive)
106, 107, 109 and 110.

3. All Head Constables Functions under Sections
& Naiks, 100 to 102. 106 and 110,

(MLF. (DLR & 1) Notification No. 63-Cus. dated 3rd August.

LOT4).

[PAGE 230]
BSF RULES 229
PASSPORT (ENTRY IN TO INDIA) ACT, 1920
Gazette of India, dated 22nd Sep 1969
Ministry of Home Affairs
ORDER

5.0, 3996 - Whereas the Central Government is of

: opinion that for the purposes specified in clause (i) and clause
(ii) of sub section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security
Force Act 1968 (47 of 1968), an officer of a rank
corresponding to or lower than that of officers and
subordinate officers of the Force is empowered to exercise
the powers and discharge the duties under section 4 of the
passport (Entry into India) Act 1920 (34 of 1920).

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
sub section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security Force
Act 1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby directs
that for the purposes referred to in clause (i) and clause (ii)
of that sub section any officer or subordinate officer of the
Force May. within the local limits of areas specified in the
schedule annexed hereto, exercise and discharge the powers
and duties under section 4 of the Passport (Entry into India)
Act 1920 (34 of 1920),

Schedule
1, The whole of the area comprised in the Union
Territories of Manipur and Tripura and the state of Jammu
and Kashmir.
2, 50 much of the area comprised within a belt of eighty
kilometres in the state of Gujrat, fifty kilometres in the state
of Rajasthan and fifteen kilometres in the state of Punjab,
West Bengal and Assam, running along the borders of India.
No. P 31/7/69 BSF
G..S8. GREWAR, Dy Secy.

[PAGE 231]
230 BSF RULES
ee eee
PASSPORT ACT, 1967
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
GAZETTE NOTIFICATION
ORDER
New Delhi, the 29th August 73

5.0, 499 (E) - Whereas the Central Government is of
opinion that for the purposes specified in clause (i) and clause
(i) of sub section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security
Force Act 1968 (47 of 1968), an officer of a rank
corresponding to or lower than that of officers, and
subordinate officers of the Force is empowered to exercise
the powers and discharge the duties under section 13 of the
Passport Act 1967 (15 of 1967).

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
sub section (1) of section 139 of the Border Security Force
Act, 1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby
directs that for the purposes referred to in clause (i) and clause
(ii) of that sub section any officer or subordinate officer of
the force may, within the local limits of the areas specified
in the schedule annexed hereto, exercise the powers and
discharge the duties under section 13 of the Passport Act,
1967 (15 of 1967).

Schedule
1. The whole of the area comprised in the Union territories
of Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram, Nagaland, Meghalaya and
the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
2. So much of the area comprised within the belt of eighty
kilometers in the state of Gujral, fifty kilometres in the state
of Rajasthan and fifteen kilometers in the state of Punjab,
West Bengal and Assam, running along the borders of India,
No, F 4/5/71-CLO/BSF
C. G. SOMIAH, Jt Seey (P)

[PAGE 232]
BSF RULES 21
POLICE POWERS (POWERS UNDER NARCOTICS
DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES
ACT-1985)

Powers of arrest, search and seizure were conferred
on BSF personnel under the Opium Act-1878 and the
Dangerous Drugs Act 1930 vide Gazette Notification No.
3621 dated 19 Aug’71. After the coming into Force of the
Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act-1985, both
these Acts viz-the Optum Act and the Dangerous Drugs Act
have been repealed, Consequently, the gazette notification
referred to above stands cancelled.

2. Vide section 37 of the Narcotics Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act-1985 every offence punishable
under the said Act has been made cognizable. BSF has been
empowered to arrest persons invelved in congnivable
offences within the preseribed limits of their areas of
deployment, under the provisions of the Cr. P.C. except, in
the State of J&K. Therefore, offenders under the Narcotics
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act can be arrested bv
SF personnel in exercise of their powers under the Cr.P.C.

Authority- CLO FHQ Letter No, 1/31/89-CLO/BSP/

444-614 dated O1 Feb “89,

[PAGE 233]
232 BSF RULES
PUBLIC PREMISES
(EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS)
ACT, 1971
GOI, MHA NEW DELHI
THE 29 OCT’ 77
: NOTIFICATION
8.0. 3520 - In exercise of the powers conferred by
section 3 of the public premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act 1971 (40 of 1971), the Central Government
hereby appoints the officers mentioned in Column (1) of the
Table below, being officer equivalent to the rank of gazetted
officers of Government, to be estate officers for the purpose
of the said Act, who shall exercise the powers conferred and
perform the duties imposed on estate Officer by or under the
said Act within the local limits of their respective jurisdiction
in respect of the Public premises specified in the
corresponding entries in Columm (2) of the said Table.
The Table
Sl Designation of the Officer Categories of public pre-
No. mises and local limits
jurisdiction
(a) All Inspector General Premises under the
of BSF administrative control of the
Border Security Force situated
within the local limits of their
respective jurisdiction.
(b) All Deputy Inspector -do-
General of BSF
(c) All Comandants of BSF -do-
Bn.
Sel’-
(P. K..G. KAIMAL)
Dy. Seeretary of the GOI
File No. 25013/29/77-GPA_II

[PAGE 234]
BSF RULES 233
WEST BENGAL MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC ORDER
ACT, 1972
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
New Delhi. the 12th August, [974
NOTIFICATION

5.0, 2092 - In exercise of the powers conferred by
sub-section (2) of section 139 of the Border Security Force
Act, 1968 (47 of 1968). the Central Government hereby
confer. with the consent of the State Government of West
Bengal, upon members of the Border Security Foree. the
powers which may be exercised by any police officer under
Section 13 of the West Bengal Maintenance of Public Order
Act, 1972 (West Bengal Act IX of 1972).

(F. No. 17/7/70-CLO of BSF/GPA-I)
M.L. MEHTA, Deputy Seev.

[PAGE 235]
234 BSF RULES
MADHYA PRADESH ACT, 1968
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
New Delhi, the 10th March, 198]

ORDER

5.0. 159 (E) - In exercise of the powers conferred by
sub-section (2) of section 139 of the Border Security Force
Act, 1968 (47 of 1968), the Central Government hereby
confer, with the concurrence of the State Government of
Madhya Pradesh, upon members of the Border Security
Foree, the powers which may be exercised by the members
of the corresponding ranks of the Madhya Pradesh Special
Armed Force under section 8 of the Madhya Pradesh Act 29
of 1968.

(No. TT 11020/1/81-G & Q)
8. 8. JOG, Jt. Seey

[PAGE 236]
BSF RULES 235
Published in the gazette of India Part-I
Section sub-section (ii) dated 24 July’ 1971
MADHYA PRADESH ACT, 1968
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
(GRIH MANTRALAYA)
New Delhi, the 6th July’ 1971
5.0. 2843 - In exercise of the powers conferred by
section 68 of the Border Security Force Aci, 1968 (47 of
1968), the Central Government hereby declares the posts
mentioned in column 2 of the table below as equivalent to
the posts mentioned in the corresponding entry in column |
of the said Table.
THE TABLE
Sl. Posts and ranks Posts and rank in the
No. in the Police Border Security Force
i) (2)
1. Confirmed Deputy Confirmed Assistant
Superintendent of Commandant.
Police.
2. Assistant Superint- Assistant Commandant
endent of Police/
Dy-Superintendent
of Police.
(No.10/1/69-CLO/BSF/GPA-l}
PP. KHANNA
Deputy Secretary

[PAGE 237]
236 BSF RULES
; DISCIPLINARY POWERS OF VARIOUS OFFICERS
U/S-55 OF THE BSF ACT-1968
The Director General, with the consent of the Central
Government, has empowered the Commandant of a Battalion
or Unit to proceed, in the prescribed manner against a
subordinate officer serving under his command who is
charged with an offenee under this Act, and award one or
more of the following punishments, that is to say:-

(a) Reprimand or severe reprimand:

(b) Stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved
loss or damage occasioned by the offence of
which he is convicted, is made good.

2. In every case in which punishment has been awarded
under sub-section (1), certified true copies of the proceedings
shall be forwarded, by the officer awarding the punishment,
; to the DIG under whom he may be serving.
1969 of DD Org, Dte Genl BSF.

[PAGE 238]
BSF RULES 237
DISCIPLINARY POWERS OF VARIOUS OFFICERS
UNDER SECTION 53 OF THE BORDER SECURITY

FORCE ACT, 1968
The Director General, with the consent of the Central
Government, has empowered the Officers mentioned in
column (i) to proceed in the prescribed manner. against
persons subject to the Act, under their command specified
in column (2) who are charged with an offence under this
Act and award one or more of the punishments mentioned
in column (3) below:-
Authority To whom awardable Punishment
Deputy Enrolled persons (a) Imprisonment in Force
Comat. Custody upto I+ days,
(b) All other punishments
mentioned in séction 53
to full extent,
Under Officers Reprimand or severe
reprimand,
Assti.Comdt! Enrolled persons (a) Imprisonment in Force
Coy Comdr! Custody upto 7 days.
Adjutant’
Quarter Master
(b) All other punishments
mentioned in section 53
ta the full extent,

: 2. In every case in which punishment has been awarded
under Para-] above, certified true copies of the proceedings
shall be forwarded, by the officer awarding the punishment,
to the Commandant,

(authority: - DD (Org) FHQ Letter No. F. 3(3)69/ORG

BSF dated 11 March’ 69).

Note:- 1. The words “enrolled persons” mentioned
in column 2 above against the power of
Assistant Commandants excludes the “under
officer”, Assistant Commandants have no
power to punish’ under officer? (Auth CLO
letter No. 11(19)/17-CLO/BSF dated 31 July
1971,

[PAGE 239]
238 BSF RULES
*FORM OF PROCEEDINGS FOR GENERAL &
. PETTY SECURITY FORCE COURTS
UNDER THE BSF ACT
Proceedings of a General Security Force Court held
at on the days of 20 _ byorder
of Shri Inspector General/Dy
Inspector General BSF dated the day
of 20 ;
Presiding Officer
Shri Rank _ Unit
Member
lL. Shri, Rank Unit
2. a a
4, eee eee
Law Officer
Shri SS
Interpreter
Trial of No. Name
Rank Unit
The order convening the Court, the charge-sheet and
the ROE (or abstract) are laid before the court.
The court satisfy themselves that No.
Name __ Rank Unit
is not available to serve owing to (Insert reasons)
No. Name
Rank Unit .

[PAGE 240]
“BSF RULES 239
Waiting member, takes his place as a member of the
court.
The court satisfy themselves as provided by BSF Rule
65, The accused is brought before the court.
Prosecutor
(Legal qualification to be stated)

Counsel/Defending Officer.

At hrs the trial commences,

The order convening the court is read and is marked
: signed by the Law Officer (Presiding

Officer) and attached to the proceedings. The names of the

Presiding Officer and Members of the court are read over in

the hearing of the accused, and they severally answer to their

names.

£. Q-1 Do you object to be tried by me as Presiding
Officer, or any of the officers whose names
you have heard/ read over ?

A-]

Noate:- * All printed matter not applicable to the
particular court being held should be struck
out & initialled by the officer responsible for
the record (Rule 119).

£. All questions and answers will be numbered
; serially through-out the proceedings.
£. This question will be asked by the Presiding
Officer to the accused (Rule 66).

[PAGE 241]
240 BSF RULES
“RY
The Presiding Officer. Members and Law Officer are
duly sworn/affirmed.
Q-2 Do you object to Shri_ as
interpreter
A-2
Shri_ Rank
Unit is duly sworn/affirmed as inter-
- preter.
Q-3 Do you object to Shri as
shorthand writer ?
A-3
Shri Rank Unit
is duly sworn/affirmed as shorthand writer,
CHARGE SHEET
“B-2” The charge sheet is signed by the Law Officer
(Presiding Officer) marked “B-2” and annexed to the
Proceedings, The accused is arraigned upon each charge in
the above mentioned charge sheet (Rule 71).
Q-4 Are you guilty or not guilty of the (first) charge
against you, which you have heard’read ?
a
Q-5 Are you guilty or not guilty of the second charge
against you, which you have heard/read ?
A
Note:- (@ The accused having pleaded guilty to the charge (s), the
provision of BSF Rule 78 are here complied with. *If the trial
proceeds on more than one charge sheet, the trial on each charge
sheet, from arraignmentto finding, will be kept separate and distinet.
(@ If the trial proceeds upon any charge to which there is a
piea of “not guilty” the court will not proceed upon the reeord
of plea of “guilty” until after the finding on that other charge
[Rule 80 (2),

[PAGE 242]
BSF RULES 241
ba] Gls
PROCEEDINGS ON PLEA OF NOT GUILTY
Q-6 * De you wish to apply for an adjournment on the
*Rule 83. ground that any of the rules relating to procedure
before trial have not been complied with and that
you have been prejudiced thereby or on the ground
that you have not had sufficient opportunity for
preparing your defence?
A-6
The prosecutor hands in a written address which is
read, marked * “signed by the Law
Officer (Presiding Officer) and attached to the
proceedings,
The prosecutor proceeds to call witnesses.
First witness for prosecution
PW-1 Nao. Name
Rank Unit being duly
sworn/affirmed is examined by the prosecutor,
Note: 1, At the end of each witness’s evidence,
provisions of BSF Rule 90 will be complied
with and a record made,
2. In case the presiding Officer, Law Officer or
a member address any question to the
witness, BSF Rule 89 should be complied
with and the fact recorded.
3. For form of oath or affirmation see BSF Rule
§8(4).

[PAGE 243]
242 BSF RULES
bd ID
The prosecution is closed.
DEFENCE
Q-7 Do you intent to call any witness in your defence?
AP _
Q-8 Is he a witness to character only ?
A
Instructions to the court
When the answers to the above questions have been
: recorded, the court shall comply with the provisions of BSF
Rule 93,

The Evidence of the witnesses for the defence
(including witnesses as to character) is recorded overleaf.
Such evidence will be taken after the questions, if any, to the
accused have been addressed,

Q-9 Do you intend to give evidence on oath as a witness
or make a statement without being sworn ?
a

* The accused in his defence says..............0r hands in
a written address which is read marked............... signed by
the Law Officer (Presiding Officer) and attached to the
Proceedings. or the accused declines to make any statement.
Note:- * In case the accused wishes to give evidence on

oath, he will be examined as any other witness.

[PAGE 244]
BSF RULES 243
QUESTION TO THE ACCUSED
* Rule 93 (2)

The Law Officer (Presiding Officer) reads and explains
the provisions of BSF Rule 93, Having ascertained
that the accused understands the provisions read over
to him, the Court (Law Officer) Proceed(s) to ask
the following questions.

Q-10

Fe

Q-1]

A-11

Q-12

A-12

Instructions to the Court

1. The accused must be questioned only to afford an

opportunity of offering an explanation, ifhe so wishes, where

absence of such explanation, would affect him adversely,

2. Questions put to him should be such as will enable
- him to explain any circumstances appearing against him.

which if unexplained, may lead to conviction.

3. Questions must not be put to the accused in order to

supplement the case for the prosecution.

4. Questions to the accused and his answers both will be

recorded verbatim as far as possible,

5. All addresses by Prosecutor, accused, counsel. or

defending officer, whether recorded by the Court or handed

in writing (and written summing up by Law Officer) will be

attached to the Proceedings in the order in which they are

made. Written addresses (and summing up) will be read to

the Court. marked and signed by the Presiding Officer (Law

Officer except summing up).

6. If any person who is entitled to make an address,

declines to do so, a record will be made to that effect.

7. For order of addresses See BSF Rule 96.

[PAGE 245]
244 BSF RULES
“Dp 2"

The accused (Counsel or Defending Officer) makes
an opening address, (or hands in a written opening address
which is read, marked .......00.......Signed by the Law
Officer (Presiding Officer) and attached to the Proceedings).

The accused calls the following witness* (as to
character).

* DW-l

First witness for the defence (as te character)*

Shri ee being duly sworn (or
affirmed) is examined by the accused (or by counsel or

+s defending officer).

Note:- Atthe end of cach witness’s evidence, provisions
of BSF Rule 89 and 90 as applicable will be complied
with and the fact recorded,

* If witnesses are called excepting as to character, these

words are to be struck out.

[PAGE 246]
BSF RULES 245
‘cc
7 PROCEEDINGS ON PLEA OF ‘GUILTY’
* (The charge/charges to which he was pleaded “guilty”
isfare read to him again).

id lo be struck out in case on plea of “not guilty” has

been proceeded with.

The accused No: _Name

Pank Unit__is found guilty of the charge (all

the charges) or is found guilty of the charge &

not guilty of the charge.

Announcement of Finding({s)

The finding(s) is/are read in open court and is/are
announced as being subject to confirmation.

** The ROE (or abstract) is read, marked _

signed by the Law Officer (Presiding Officer) and attached

/ to the Proceedings.

** Tf there is no ROE (or abstract) the court shall record

sulficient evidence to enable it to determine the sentence,

Rule 81(2).

Q-13 Do you wish to make any statement in mitigation of
punishment ?

i-13 The accused, in mitigation of punishment, says (or
hands in a written statement which is read,
marked signed by the Law Officer
(Presiding Officer) & attached to the Proceedings.)

£. The court being satisfied from the statement of the

accused or Record (or abstract) of evidence or otherwise that
the accused did not understand the effect of the plea of

‘guilty’. the record and enters a plea of “not guilty’.

£. To be struck out if not applicable. Rule 82/2).

[PAGE 247]
246. BSF RULES
‘DD’
WITNESSES FOR DEFENCE ON PLEA OF GUILTY
Q-14 Do you wish to call any witness as to character ?
A-14
Q-15 Do you wish to call any witness in mitigation of
punishment ?
ALS
, Evidence as to character and/or in mitigation of
punishment.

Shri being duly sworn/
alfirmed is examined by the accused or by counsel or
defending officer.

N.B:-At the end of each witness’s evidence, provisions of
BSF Rules 89 and 90, as applicable be complied with and
the fact recorded.

[PAGE 248]
BSF RULES 247
FINDING

The court is closed for the consideration of the finding,
* to he omitted exe opt inrcase of a plea of =not 1 ity:
having been proceeded with.
The court tind that the accused No.
Rank Name Unit_
is guilty (not guilty) of the charge.

ANNOUNCEMENT OF FINDING (S)

The court being reopened the accused is again brought
before it. The finding(s) is/are read in open court, and is/are
announced as being subject to confirmation.

[PAGE 249]
248 BSF RULES
: PROCEEDINGS ON CONVICTION

No, Rank Name
Unit/Bn is duly sworn/aftirmed.

(Q-16 What records have you to produce in proof of former
convictions against the accused and his character ?

A-16 1 produce a statement certified under the hand of the
officer having custody of the Bn records.

The statement is read, marked signed by
the Law Officer (Presiding Officer) and attached to the
Proceedings.

Q-17 Is the accused, the person named in the statement you
have, heard/read ?

A-17 —

; Q-18 Have you compared the contents of the above statement

with the Bn records ?

A-18 —

Q-19 Are they true extract from the Bn records, and is the
statement of entrics in the defaulter sheet, a fair and
true summary of these entries ?

A-19

Cross examined by the accused (or by Counsel or

defending officer).
Re-examined. or
The accused declined to cross examine the witnesses,
Note:- Provisions of BSF Rule 89 and 90, as
applicable, will be complied with and the fact
recorded,

Q-20 Do you wish to address the court in mitigation of
sentenee.

A-20 ;

[PAGE 250]
BSF RULES 249
i
The court ts closed for the consideration of the sentence,
SENTENCE
The court sentence the accused No_
Rank_ Name_ __of
Bn/Unit_ te) '
ANNOUNCEMENT OF SENTENCE
The court being reapened, the aceused is brought before
il. The sentence is announced in open court as being subject
to confirmation.
Signed at this day of 20).
(Law Officer) Presiding Officer
Confirmation
Promulgation
[Rule 106 (8}|
The finding and sentence of the General/Petty Security
Force Court held at _ (Place)_
from, day to day for the trial of the
accused were promulgated to the
accused by me at (place) on day
of, 20 . Extracts for battalion records have been
taken/* No record has been kept of the finding and sentence,
Place 7 Signature
Date z (Commandant)
* To be used in case of aeqguittal on all charges,

[PAGE 251]
250 BSF RULES
FORM OF PROCEEDINGS FOR SUMMARY
SECURITY FORCE COURT
oA
Proceedings of a Summary Security Force Court held
at on the, day of
20 __by Commandant
Bn for the trial ef all such accused persons as he
may duly have brought before him.
PRESENT
COMMANDANT
ATTENDING THE TRIAL
INTERPRETER
FRIEND OF THE ACCUSED
“ ‘The Officers assemble at the and
the trial commences at_ hrs.
The accused No Rank ;
Name __of is brought
(“Called” ifan under officer) into court.
* __the Court, is duly sworn/affirmed
is sworm/aftirmed as interpreter,
All witnesses are directed to withdraw from the Court.
*|, Enter rank and name of the. Officer holding the trial,
2. Through out these proceedings “he” is referred ta av “The Court’
3, Jnapplicable portions be deleted and initialled by the Court,

[PAGE 252]
BSF RULES 251
‘Bp’

The charge sheet is read (translated) and explaind the
accused, marked signed by the Court and
attached to the proceedings.

*Q-1 How say you No Rank
Name _ are you guilty or not
guilty of the first charge/ charge ?
, Question to the accused.
Ans-1

** The accused having pleaded guilty to
charge, the court explains to the accused the meaning of
charge(s) to which he has pleaded guilty and ascertains that
the accused understands the nature of the charge(s) to which
he has pleaded guilty. The Court also inform the accused the
general effect of that plea and the difference in procedure
which will be followed consequent to the said plea, The Court
having satisfied itself that the accused understands the
charge(s) and the effect of his plea of guilty, accepts and
records the same. The provisions of Rule 142 (2) are complied
with.

¥ In case of more than one charge accused should be questioned
separately:

*e In cases where on arraignment, an accused pléady ewilty ta a
charge, Rule [42 (2) should be explained to the accused and
the above minute should be recorded in the proceedings before
recording a finding of Guilty,

[PAGE 253]
252 BSF RULES
bf

PROCEEDINGS ON A PLEA OF GUILTY

The accused No Rank

7 Name of is found guilty of
the charge (all the charges).

The record of evidence is read (translated), explained,
marked signed by the Court and attached to the
Proceedings.

*Q- Do you wish to make any statement in reference to the
charge or in mitigation of Punishment ?
* Question to the accused.
Ans- The accused says .
*Q- Do you wish to call any witness as to character ?
* Question to the accused.
7 Ans-

[PAGE 254]
BSF RULES 253
+E?
PROCEEDINGS ON A PLEA OF NOT GUILTY
PROSECUTION
PROSECUTION
Ist Witness
: Religion to be recorded
: (Hindu, Muslim affirm;
: Sikh, Christian-sworn)}
being duly sworn/affirmed is examined by the court.
Note:- lf the accused declines to cross examine witness
for the Prosecution. the fact must be recorded. The
fact that the Provisions of Border Security Force rule
90 have been complied with must be recorded at the
conclusion of the evidence of each witness,

[PAGE 255]
254 BSF RULES
Sa
*—T)-2°

PROSECUTION
2nd Witness
See eee eee eee

Religion to be recorded.

: (Hindu. Muslim affirm:

; Sikh, Christian-sworn).
nnn nN ee
being duly sworn/affirmed is examined by the court.

a
Nate:- [f the accused declines to cross examine a witness
for the Prosecution. the fact must be recorded. The
fact that the Provisions of Border Security Force rule
90 have been complied with, must be recorded at the
conclusion of the evidence of cach witness.

[PAGE 256]
BSF RULES 255
‘E’
THE PROSECUTION IS CLOSED
: ©- Do you intend to call any witness in your defence ?
Question to the accused,
Ans-
DEFENCE
The accused is called upon for his defence and states:-
No oath/alfirmation to be administered to the accused.
Accused not to be cross examined,

[PAGE 257]
256 BSF RULES
‘Fe’
Defence Ist
Witness
: Religion to be recorded.
z (Hindu, Muslim affirm:
: Sikh, Christian-sworn).
being duly sworn/affirmed is examined by the accused.
Note:- If necessary the Court may cross examine and
the accused may re-examine a witness for the
defence. The fact that the Provisions of Boarder
Security Force rule 90 have been complied with must
be recorded at the conclusion of the evidence of each
witness,

[PAGE 258]
BSF RULES 257
: ‘G
THE DEFENCE IS CLOSED
REPLY REPLY Ist
Witness
: Religion to be recorded.
; (Hindu, Muslim affirm:
5 Sikh, Christian-sworn).
Being duly swort/affirmed is examined by the Court,
Note:- Ifthe accused declines to cross examine a witness
for the Prosecution, the fact must be recorded. The
fact that the provision of Border Security Foree rule
90 have been complied with must be recorded at the
conclusion of the evidence of each witness.

[PAGE 259]
258 BSF RULES
‘H’
VERDICT OF THE COURT
lam of the opinion on the evidence before me that the
accused No : Rank
Name, of is
not guilty of the charge (all the charges) and acquit him of
the same.
The verdict is read out and the accused released
Signed at this day of
20 ss
COMMANDANT
HOLDING THE TRIAL
The trial closes
at _shrs.
Note:- This page is to be used only in cases where the
accused is found “not guilty” ofall the charges.

[PAGE 260]
BSF RULES 259
eee
‘ I 1
VERDICT OF COURT

lam of the opinion on the evidence before me that
accused No. _ Rank_ _
Name _ is (guilty of the charge
or not guilty of the first charge and guilty of the second charge
or is guilty of all the charges).

PROCEEDINGS BEFORE SENTENCE

‘The following minutes by the Court are read and explained,
Instruction:- If the court docs not record the accused person’s
convictions and character of its own knowledge, evidence as to
inese matters will be taken.

Tt is within my own knowledge from the records of
the that the accused has been
previously convicted by Security Force Court or Criminal Court
(A separate statement giving full particulars of any previous
conviction to be annexed when necessary.

That the following is a fair and true summary of entries in
his defaulter sheet exclusive of convictions by a Security Force
Court ora Criminal Court.

Within last 12 months since enrolment
For times times
For times times a
For times times

‘That he is at present under going _ sentence. That,
irrespective of this trial, his general character has been }
That his age is . His service is and his rank
is (date since held),

That he has been in arrest/confinement for days
= That he is in possession of the following decorations and
rewards:- =
# Any recognised acts of gallantry or distinguished conduct
should also be entered here,

[PAGE 261]
260) BSF RULES
‘Tr’
SENTENCE BY THE COURT
Taking all these matters into consideration, 1 now
sentence the accused No Rank
Name_ of to .
Signed at this day of 20 ‘
COMMANDANT
Holding the trial
‘The trial closes at hrs.
Remarks by the reviewing officer (Border Security Force
Act Section 115).
No of 20
Trial by Summary Seeurity Force Court under the Border
Security Force Act.
No af al
on the _ day of 20 ;
Registered No of
20 Frontier
CHIEF LAW OFFICER

[PAGE 262]
BSF RULES 261
PROFORMA FOR THE STATEMENT OF
PREVIOUS CONVICTIONS AND GENERAL
CHARACTER OF THE ACCUSED PERSON AS
REQUIRED UNDER BSF RULE 101

|. Name and number of the accused:
2, ‘Present rank ;
3. Date ofenrolmentvappointment — :
in BSF
4. Date of promotion in the present rank :
5. Total length of service :
6. Date of birth and age 2
7. ‘The period of arrest/confinement till :
the date of commencement of trial
8. The decorations and awards (Any:
recognised act of gallantry or distineuished conduct should also be
entered here).
9. The details of convictions by Security :
Foree Court and criminal Court as per
annexure.
10. Punishment awarded by an officer :
exercising authority w/s 53 or 55 of
the BSF Act.
Within last 12 monthsSince enrolment/appointment
(a) ws for times (a) ws for limes.
(b} ws for times (b) ws for times.
(ec) u/s for times (c) ws for times.
11. That he is at present undergoing sentence,
12. That irrespective of this trial, his general character has
been :
(It should be assessed on the basis of his record as it
stood prior to the present trial),
(Signature)
Commandant or the Officer
having the custody of service
records/confidential dossiers.

[PAGE 263]
262 BSF RULES
Annexure
STATEMENT OF CONVICTIONS BY SECURITY
FORCE COURT OR CRIMINAL COURT
Verdict of the Court
Srl. Date of Particulars By Security Finding Sentence Remarks
No. trial of the Force Court!
charge Criminal
Court
— cs —