[PAGE 1]
Tare de Se Ve—(T7)04/0007/2003—13 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—13
JIRA a Uda
FAIRY
EXTRAORDINARY
wt WT— ave 1
PART If — Section 1
wire & were
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
=
eee eeeS-D”D”mdmoD
Pe 4] ae feret, yan, wat 4, 2013/Kh 14, 1934 (ae)
No. 4] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, JANUARY 4, 2013/PAUSA 14, 1934 (SAKA)
———————— Ee
: .
wa at 4 fs Ps don a ait t fered Pe ae em de F ST ta ae
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
———— EE e»sneeeeS eee
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 4th January, 2013/Pausa 14, 1934 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
3rd January, 2013, and is hereby published for general information.
THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) AMENDMENT ACT, 2012
(No. 3 or 2013)
[3rd January, 2013.]
An Act further to amend the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. (1) This Act may be called the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 2012. Short title
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification "4 comin the Official Gazette, appoint. mencement.
37 of 1967. 2. In section 2 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to Amendment
as the principal Act),— of section 2.
(i) clause (ea) shall be renumbered as clause (eb) and before clause (eb) as so
renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ea) “economic security” includes financial, monetary and fiscal stability,
security of means of production and distribution, food security, livelihood
security, energy security, ecological and environmental security;’;
(ii) after clause (eb) as so renumbered, the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(ec) “person” includes—
(4 an individual,

[PAGE 2]
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I]-—

(ii) a company, ;

(ii) a firm,

(iv) an organisation or an association of persons or a body of
individuals, whether incorporated or not,

(v) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the
preceding sub-clauses, and

(vi) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any person
falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses;’;

(iii) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(g) “proceeds of terrorism” means,—

(i) all kinds of properties which have been derived or obtained from
commission of any terrorist act or have been acquired through funds
traceable to a terrorist act, irrespective of person in whose name such
proceeds are standing or in whose possession they are found; or

(ii) any property which is being used, or is intended to be used, for
aterrorist act or for the purpose of an individual terrorist or aterrorist gang
or a terrorist organisation.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this Act, it is hereby declared
that the expression “proceeds of terrorism” includes any property intended
to be used for terrorism;’;

(iv) in clause (h), for the words “instruments in any form including”, the words
; “instruments in any form including but not limited to” shall be
substituted.
Amendment 3. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “two years”, the
of section 6 —_ words “five years” shali be substituted.
Amendment 4, Section 15 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (/) thereof and in
of section 15. sub-section (/) as so renumbered,—

(i) in the opening portion, after the word “security”, the words “, economic
security,” shall be inserted;

(ii) in clause (a), after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clause shall be inserted,
namely:—

“(iiia) damage to, the monetary stability of India by way of production or
smuggling or circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin
or of any other material; or";

(iii) in clause (c), for the words “any other person to do or abstain from doing
any act,”, the words “an international or inter-governmental organisation or any other
person to do or abstain from doing any act; or” shall be substituted;

(iv) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be substituted,
namely:— .

‘Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-section,—

(a) “public functionary” means the constitutional authorities or
any other functionary notified in the Official Gazette by the Central
Government as public functionary;

[PAGE 3]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
SEE ee Seneceeeeet
(6) “high quality counterfeit Indian currency” means the counterfeit
currency as may be declared after examination by an authorised or notified
forensic authority that, such currency imitates or compromises with the
key security features as specified in the Third Schedule.’:
(v) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2) The terrorist act includes an act which constitutes an offence within
the scope of, and as defined in any of the treaties specified in the Second
Schedule.”.
5. Section 16A of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of
section 16A.
6. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, Substitution of
namely:— new section
for section 17.
“17, Whoever, in India or in a foreign country, directly or indirectly, raises or Punishment
provides funds or collects funds, whether from a legitimate or illegitimate source, from for raising
any person or persons or attempts to provide to, or raises or collects funds for any puns fore
person or persons, knowing that such funds are likely to be used, in full or in part by .
such person or persons or by a terrorist organisation or by a terrorist gang or by an
individual terrorist to commit a terrorist act, notwithstanding whether such funds were
actually used or not for commission of such act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, —
(a) participating, organising or directing in any of the acts stated therein
shall constitute an offence;
; (6) raising funds shall include raising or collecting or providing funds
through production or smuggling or circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian
currency; and
; (c) raising or collecting or providing funds, in any manner for the benefit :

of, or, to an individual terrorist, terrorist gang or terrorist organisation for the

purpose not specifically covered under section 15 shall also be construed as an

offence.”.

7. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, insertion of
namely:—- new sections
22A, 22B and

22C.

‘22A. (/) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by acompany, Offences by
every person (including promoters of the company) who, at the time the offence was companies.
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of
the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
(including promoters) liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised reasonable
care to prevent the commission of such offence. .

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has

, been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on
the part of, any promoter, director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company,
such promoter, director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be
Quilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

[PAGE 4]
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II—
ae oo

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, —

(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other

association of individuals; and

(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
Offences by 22B. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or
societies or trust, every person (including the promoter of society or settlor of the trust) who at the
trusts. time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the society
or trust for the conduct of the business of the society or the trust, as well as the society
or trust, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded
against and punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised reasonable care to prevent the
commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence
under this Act has been committed by a society or trust and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to,
any neglect on the part of any promoter, director, manager, secretary, trustee or other
officer of the society or trust, such promoter, director, manager, secretary, trustee or
other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.

Explanation. — For the purpose of this section,—

(a) “society” means any body corporate registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 or any other State Act governing the registration of 21 of 1860.
societies;

(b) “trust” means any body registered under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 2 of 1882.
or any other State Act governing the registration of trusts,

(c) “director”, in relation to a society or trust, means a member of its
governing board other than an ex officio member representing the interests of
the Central or State Government or the appropriate statutory authority.

Punishment 22C. Where any offence under the Act has been committed by a company or a
for offences society or a trust, as the case may be, every person (including promoter of company or
by companies, trust or settlor of the trust) who at the time of the offence was either in charge or
enna or responsible for the conduct of the business shall be punishable with imprisonment for
, aterm which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment
for life and shall also be liable with fine which shall not be less than five crore rupees
and which may extend to ten crore rupees.’.
Amendment 8. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “chemical
of section 23. substance of warfare, he shall”, the words “chemical substance of warfare or high quality
counterfeit Indian currency, he shall” shall be substituted.
Amendment 9. In CHAPTER V of the principal Act, in the heading thereof, after the word
of heading of “TERRORISM”, the words “OR ANY PROPERTY INTENDED TO BE USED FOR
Chapter V. TERRORISM” shall be inserted.
Substitution 10. For section 24 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be substituted,
of new namely:—
sections for
section 24.
Reference to ‘24. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, all references to
proceeds of “proceeds of terrorism” shall include any property intended to be used for terrorism.
terrorism to ;
include any
property
intended to be
used for
terrorism.

[PAGE 5]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
24A. (/) No person shall hold or be in possession of any proceeds of terrorism. _ Forfeiture of
. proceeds of
(2) Proceeds of terrorism, whether held by a terrorist organisation or terrorist terrorism.
gang or by any other person and whether or not such terrorist or other person is
prosecuted or convicted for any offence under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, shall be liable
to be forfeited to the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be,
in the manner provided under this Chapter.
(3) Where proceedings have been commenced under this section, the court may
pass an order directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case may be, of property
equivalent to, or, the value of the proceeds of terrorism invloved in the offence.’.
11. In section 33 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections Amendment
shall be inserted, namely:— of section 33.
“(3) Where any person is accused of an offence concerning high quality
counterfeit Indian currency, the court may pass an order directing attachment or
forfeiture, as the case may be, of property equivalent to the value of such high quality
counterfeit Indian currency involved in the offence including the face value of such
currency which are not defined to be of high quality, but are part of the common seizure
along with the high quality counterfeit Indian currency.
(4) Where a person is accused of an offence punishable under Chapter IV or
Chapter VI, the court may pass an order directing attachment or forfeiture, as the case
may be, of property equivalent to or the value of the proceeds of terrorism involved in
the offence.
(5) Where any person is accused of an offence under Chapter IV or Chapter VI,
it shall be open to the court to pass an order that all or any of the property, movable or
immovable or both, belonging to him shall, where the trial under the Act cannot be
concluded on account of the death of the accused or being declared a proclaimed
offender or for any other reason, be confiscated on the basis of material evidence
produced before the court.”.
12. In section 35 of the principal Act,— Amendment
. of section 35.
(a) in sub-section (/),—
(2) for the word “order”, the word “notification” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the word “Schedule”, wherever it occurs, the words “First
Schedule” shall be substituted; .
(6) after sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, namely:—
: “(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, :
add to or remove or amend the Second Schedule or Third Schedule and
thereupon the Second Schedule or the Third Schedule, as the case may be, shall
be deemed to have been amended accordingly.
: (5) Every notification issued under sub-section (/) or sub-section (4)
shall, as soon as may be after it is issued, be laid before Parliament.”.
13. In section 40 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for Explanation, the following Amendment
Explanation shall be substituted, namely:— of section 40.
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, a reference to provide
money or other property includes—
(a) of its being given, lent or otherwise made available, whether or not for
consideration; or
(6) raising, collecting or providing funds through production or smuggling
or circulation of high quality counterfeit Indian currency.”.

[PAGE 6]
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I]-—Sec. 1]
Amendment 14. In the principal Act, the existing Schedule shall be renumbered as the First Schedule
of Schedule. thereof, and after the First Schedule as so renumbered, the following Schedules shall be

inserted, namely:—

“THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 15(2)}
(i) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft (1970);
(i) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation

(1971);

(ii) Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally

Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents (1973),

(iv) International Convention against the Taking of Hostages (1979);
(v) Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (1980);

(vi) Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving
International Civil Aviation, supplementary to the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation (1988);

(vii) Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the safety of Maritime
Navigation (1988);

(viii) Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms
located on the Continental Shelf (1988); and

(ix) International Convention for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings (1997).

THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See caluse (b) of Explanation to section 15(/)}

Security features to define high quality counterfeit Indian currency notes

(a) water mark;

(6) latent image; and

(c) see through registration in the currency notes.”.

P.K. MALHOTRA,
Secy. to the Govt. of India.
PRINTED BY DIRECTORATE OF PRINTING AT GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD,
NEW DELHI AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2013
GMGIPMRND—-4444GI(S3)—05-01-2013.