[PAGE 1]
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 30th July, 2012

G.S.R.614(E).- In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to article 309 of the
constitution and in supersession of the Assistant Custodian of Enemy Property for
IndiaRecruitment Rules, 1984, except as respects things done or omitted to be done before such
supersession, the Central Government hereby makes the following rules regulating the method of
recruitment to the post of the Assistant Custodian of Enemy Property in the office of Custodian of
Enemy Property for India, Mumbai, namely: -

1. Short title and commencement.-(1) These rules may be called the Assistant Custodian of
Enemy Property Recruitment Rules 2012.

(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.

2. Number of posts, classification and Pay Band and Grade Pay or Pay Scale. - The number of
the said post, its classification and the pay band and grade pay or pay scale attached thereto, shall be
as specified in columns 2 to 4 of the Schedule appended to these rules.

3. Method of recruitment, age limit and other qualifications: - The method of recruitment, age
limit, qualifications and other matters relating to the said post shall be as specified in columns 5 to 13
of the said Schedule.

4. Disqualifications. - No person, -
(a) who has entered into or contracted a marriage with a person having a spouse living; or
(b) who, having a spouse living, has entered into or contracted a marriage with any
person,

shall be eligible for appointment to the said post:

Provided that the Central Government may, if satisfied that such marriage is permissible
under the personal law applicable to such person and the other party to the marriage and there are
other grounds for so doing, exempt any person from the operation of this rule.

5. Power to relax. - Where the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or
expedient so to do, it may, by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, and in consultation with
the Union Public Service Commission, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any
class or category of persons.

6. Saving. -Nothing in these rules affect reservations relaxation in age limit and other
concessions required to be provided for the Scheduled Castes the Scheduled Tribes and other special
categories of persons in accordance with the orders issued by the Central Government from time to
time in this regard.

[PAGE 2]
SCHEDULE

Name of Numbe Classification Pay Band and Grade Pay or Whether Age limit Educatio
the post. r of . Pay Scale. selection for direct nal and
posts. post or recruits. other
non- qualificat
selection ions
post. required
for direct
recruits.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Assistant 3* General Pay Band-2 (Rs.9300- Selection Not Not
Custodia (2012) Central 34800)and Grade Pay post. applicable applicabl
n of *Subje Service, Rs.4600/- e
Enemy ct to Group ‘B’,
Property. variatio Gazetted,
n Nondepend Ministerial.
ent on
work
load

Whether Period Method of In case of recruitment by If a Circumsta
age and of recruitment, promotion or Departm nces in
education probati whether by deputation/absorption, ental which
al on if direct grades from which Promotio Union
qualificat any. recruitment promotion or n Public
ions or by deputation/absorption to be Committ Service
prescribe promotion or made. ee Commissi
d for by exists, on is to be
direct deputation/ab what is consulted
recruits sorption and its in making
will percentage of composit recruitme
apply in the vacancies ion. nt.
the case to be filled by
of various
promotes methods.
.
8 9 10 11 12 13
Not 2 years (i) fifty Promotion.- Group Consultati
applicabl forpro percent by Superintendent or ‘B’ DPC on with
e motees. promotion Assistant or Stenographer (For the UPSC
failing which Grade-1 (Group-B) having consideri necessary
by deputation five years regular service in ng while
pay band-2 (Rs.9300- promotio appointin
(ii) fifty 34800)and grade pay n) g an

[PAGE 3]
percent ofRs.4200. office on
deputation/ab 1. deputatio
sorption Note 1.- Where juniors Director n/
who have completed their (Enemy absorptio
qualifying/eligibility Property) n
service are being Chairma
considered for promotion, n.
their senior would also be
considered provided they 2.
are not short of the Custodia
requisite qualifying/ n of
eligibility service by more Enemy
than half of such Property
qualifying/ eligibility –
service or two years, Member
whichever is less, and have
successfully completed 3. Under
probation period for Secretary
promotion to the next (Enemy
higher grade along with Property
their juniors who have –
already completed such Member
qualifying/ eligibility
service.

Note 2.-For the purpose of
computing minimum
qualifying service for
promotion, the service
rendered on a regular basis
by an Officer prior to 1st
January, 2006, the date
from which the revised pay
structure based on the 6th
Central Pay Commission
Recommendations has been
extended, shall be deemed
to be service rendered in
the corresponding Grad
Pay/Pay Scale extended
based on the
recommendations of the
Pay Commission.

Deputation.-

[PAGE 4]
Officers of the Central
Government -
(a) (i) holding analogous
posts on regular basis in the
parent cadre; or
(ii) with five years regular
service in pay band-2
(Rs.9300-34800) with
grade pay of Rs.4200/-; and

(b) possessing two years’
experience of
administration,
establishment and accounts
matters.

Note 1.-The departmental
officials in the feeder
category who are in the
direct line of promotion
will not be eligible for
Consideration for
appointment on deputation.
Similarly, deputationists
shall not be eligible for
Considerationfor
appointment by promotion.
(Period of deputation
including period of
deputation to another excadre post held
immediately preceding this
appointment in the same or
some other
organization/department of
the Central Government
shall ordinarily not exceed
three years.

Note2.-The maximum age
limit for appointment by
deputation shall be not
exceeding fifty-six years as
on the closing date of the
receipt of applications.

[PAGE 5]
Note 3.- For the purpose of
appointment on
deputation/absorption
basis, the service rendered
on a regular basis by an
officer prior to 1st January,
2006 (the date from which
the revised pay structure
based on the 6th Central
Pay Commission
recommendation has been
extended) shall be deemed
to be service rendered in
the corresponding grade
pay or pay scale extended
based on the
recommendations of the
pay commission except
where there has been
merger of more then one
pre-revised scale of pay
into one grade with a
common grade pay or pay
scale and where this benefit
will extend only for the
post(s) for which that grade
pay or pay scale is the
normal replacement grade
without any up gradation.

File No. 37/17/2008 – EP

S.K. Ahuja
Under Secretary