[PAGE 1]
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS

NOTIFICATION

New Delhi, the 10th December, 2003

G.S.R.937(E).- In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-sections (1) and (3) of

section 18 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955), the Central Government hereby

makes the following rules, namely :-

1. Short title and commencement. – (1) These rules may be called the Citizenship

(Registration of Citizens and Issue of National Identity Cards) Rules, 2003.

(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official

Gazette.

2. Definitions. – In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, –

(a) “Act” means the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955);

(b) “Chief Registrar of Births and Deaths” means the Chief Registrar of Births

and Deaths appointed under the Registration of Births and Deaths Act,

1969 (18 of 1969);

(c) “Citizen” means the Citizen of India in terms of the Constitution of India

and provisions of the Act;

(d) “Director of Citizen Registration” means the Director of Census in a State

or Union territory appointed by the Central Government under the Census

Act, 1948 (37 of 1948), who shall also function as the Director of Citizen

Registration in that State, or as the case may be, in the Union territory;

(e) “District Register of Indian Citizens” means the register containing details

of Indian Citizens usually residing in the district;

(f) “District Registrar of Citizen Registration” means the District Magistrate of

every revenue district, by whatever name known, who shall act as the

District Registrar of Citizen Registration;

(g) “Local Register of Indian Citizens” means the register containing details of

Indian Citizens usually residing in a village or rural area or town or ward or

demarcated area (demarcated by the Registrar General of Citizen

Registration) within a ward in a town or urban area;

(h) “Local Registrar of Citizen Registration” means a local officer, or a

revenue officer, appointed by the State Government at the lowest

geographical jurisdiction, that is to say, of a village or rural area or town, or

[PAGE 2]
ward or demarcated area (demarcated by the Registrar General of Citizen

Registration) within a ward in a town or urban area, who shall function as

Local Registrar for the purpose of preparation of Local Register of Indian

Citizens;

(i) “National Identity Card” means the identity card issued under rule 13;

(j) “National Identity Number” means a unique identity number allotted to

every Indian Citizen by the Registrar General of Citizen Registration,

India;

(k) “National Register of Indian Citizens” means the register containing details

of Indian Citizens living in India and outside India;

(l) “Population Register” means the register containing details of persons

usually residing in a village or rural area or town or ward or demarcated

area (demarcated by the Registrar General of Citizen Registration) within

a ward in a town or urban area;

(m) “Registrar General of Citizen Registration” means the Registrar General,

India, appointed under the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 (18

of 1969), who shall also function as the Registrar General of Citizen

Registration, India;

(n) “State Register of Indian Citizens” means the register containing details of

Indian Citizens usually residing in the State;

(o) “Sub-district or Taluk Registrar of Citizen Registration” means the Sub-

district Magistrate or Taluk Executive Magistrate of every sub-district or

taluk, by whatever name known, as the case may be, who shall function

as Sub-district or Taluk Registrar of Citizen Registration;

(p) “Sub-district Register of Indian Citizens” means the register containing

details of Indian Citizens usually residing in a taluk, or by whatever name

known, of the sub-district.

3. National Register of Indian Citizens. – (1) The Registrar General of Citizen

Registration shall establish and maintain the National Register of Indian Citizens.

(2) The National Register of Indian Citizens shall be divided into sub-parts

consisting of the State Register of Indian Citizens, the District Register of Indian

Citizens, the Sub-district Register of Indian Citizens and the Local Register of Indian

Citizens and shall contain such details as the Central Government may, by order, in

consultation with the Registrar General of Citizen Registration, specify.

[PAGE 3]
(3) The National Register of Indian Citizens shall contain the following particulars

in respect of every Citizen, namely :-

(i) Name;

(ii) Father’s name;

(iii) Mother’s name;

(iv) Sex;

(v) Date of birth;

(vi) Place of birth;

(vii) Residential address (present and permanent);

(viii) Marital status – if ever married, name of the spouse;

(ix) Visible identification mark;

(x) Date of registration of Citizen;

(xi) Serial number of registration; and

(xii) National Identity Number.

(4) The Central Government may, by an order issued in this regard, decide a

date by which the Population Register shall be prepared by collecting information

relating to all persons who are usually residing within the jurisdiction of Local

Registrar.

(5) The Local Register of Indian citizens shall contain details of persons after due

verification made from the Population Register.

4. Preparation of the National Register of Indian Citizens. – (1) The Central

Government shall, for the purpose of National Register of Indian Citizens, cause to

carry throughout the country a house-to-house enumeration for collection of

specified particulars relating to each family and individual, residing in a local area

including the Citizenship status.

(2) The Registrar General of Citizen Registration shall notify the period and

duration of the enumeration in the Official Gazette.

(3) For the purposes of preparation and inclusion in the Local Register of Indian

Citizens, the particulars collected of every family and individual in the Population

Register shall be verified and scrutinized by the Local Registrar, who may be

assisted by one or more persons as specified by the Registrar General of Citizen

Registration.

(4) During the verification process, particulars of such individuals, whose

Citizenship is doubtful, shall be entered by the Local Registrar with appropriate

remark in the Population Register for further enquiry and in case of doubtful

[PAGE 4]
Citizenship, the individual or the family shall be informed in a specified proforma

immediately after the verification process is over.

(5) (a) Every person or family specified in sub-rule (4), shall be given an

opportunity of being heard by the Sub-district or Taluk Registrar of Citizen

Registration, before a final decision is taken to include or to exclude their particulars

in the National Register of Indian Citizens.

(b) The Sub-district or Taluk Registrar shall finalize his findings within a

period of ninety days of the entry being made, or within such reasonable extended

time for which he shall record the reasons in writing.

(6) (a) The draft of the Local Register of Indian Citizens shall be published by

the Sub-district or Taluk Registrar, for inviting any objections or for inclusion of any

name or corrections for the family or individual particulars collected and proposed to

be finally entered in the National Register of Indian Citizens.

(b) Any objection against a particular entry or for inclusion of a name, or

corrections if any, in the Local Register of Indian Citizens may be made within a

period of thirty days from the date of publication of the draft of the Local Register of

Indian Citizens, spelling out the nature and reasons for the objection in such form as

may be specified by the Registrar General of Citizen Registration.

(c) Subject to the provisions contained in clause (a) of sub-rule (5), the Sub-

district or Taluk Registrar shall consider such objections and summarily dispose off

the same within a period of ninety days, and thereafter submit the Local Register of

Indian Citizens so prepared to the District Registrar of Citizen Registration who shall

cause the entries in the Local Register of Indian Citizens, to be transferred to the

National Register of Indian Citizens.

(7) (a) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Sub-district or Taluk

Registrar under sub-rule (5) or sub-rule (6), may prefer an appeal within thirty days

from the date of such order, to the District Registrar of Citizen Registration.

(b) The District Registrar of Citizen Registration shall take a final decision, after

giving an opportunity of being heard to the person so aggrieved, within a period of

ninety days from the date of appeal.

(c) In case the appeal is allowed, the particulars shall be entered in the National

Register of Indian Citizens.

5. Officials of the Central Government, State Governments and local bodies to

assist the Registrar General of Citizen Registration. – Every official of the Central

Government, State Government, local bodies or their undertakings shall assist the

Registrar General of Citizen Registration or any person authorized by him in this

[PAGE 5]
behalf, in preparation of the database relating to each family and every person, and

in implementing the provisions of these rules.

6. Initialization of National Register of Indian Citizens. – (1) The Registrar

General of Citizen Registration shall, by order, notify the date on which the National

Register of Indian Citizens shall be initialized throughout the country.

(2) The order made under sub-rule (1) may provide for the initialization period

specified by the Registrar General of Citizen Registration for establishment of the

National Register of Indian Citizens.

(3) Every individual must get himself registered with the Local Registrar of Citizen

Registration during the period of initialization as specified under sub-rule (2).

7. Head of family and individual to act as informant. – (1) It shall be compulsory

for every Citizen of India to assist the officials responsible for preparation of the

National Register of Indian Citizens under rule 4 and get himself registered in the

Local Register of Indian Citizens during the period of initialization.

(2) It shall be the responsibility of the head of every family, during the period

specified for preparation of the Population Register, to give the correct details of

name and number of members and other particulars, as specified in sub-rule (3) of

rule 3, of the family of which he is the head.

(3) It shall be the responsibility of every Citizen to register once with the Local

Registrar of Citizen Registration and to provide correct individual particulars to that

authority.

(4) In the case of dependents, such as minor who has not attained the age of

eighteen years, or who is disabled, the responsibility of reporting the particulars

under this rule shall be of the head of the family:

Provided that in so far as inmates of institutions, such as orphanages, old age

homes, mental asylums are concerned, the responsibility for providing the requisite

details shall lie with the head of the Institution.

8. Power of District Registrar, Sub-district or Taluk Registrar or Local Registrar of

Citizen Registration to obtain information. – The District Registrar, Sub-district or

Taluk Registrar or the Local Registrar of Citizen Registration may, by order, require

any person to furnish any information within his knowledge in connection with the

determination of Citizenship status of any person and the person required to furnish

information shall be bound to comply with such requisition.

[PAGE 6]
9. Procedure as to making of entries in National Register of Indian Citizens. – The

Registrar General of Citizen Registration may, by order, specify the procedure to be

followed in preparation of the National Register of Indian Citizens and disposal of

claims and objections with regard to family and individual particulars proposed to be

entered in that Register.

10. Deletion of name and particulars from National Register of Indian Citizens. –

(1) The name and particulars of a Citizen may be removed from the

National Register of Indian Citizens by an order of the Registrar General of Citizen

Registration or any officer authorized by him in this behalf in the event of –

(i) death of the person; or

(ii) the person ceasing to be an Indian Citizen under section 8 of the

Act; or

(iii) revocation of Indian Citizenship under section 9 of the Act; or

(iv) the particulars provided by the individual or the family found to be

incorrect subsequently, thereby affecting the Citizenship status of

the person.

(2) It shall be the duty of the Indian Citizen concerned to inform the District

Registrar of Citizen Registration, within a period of thirty days, about the cessation of

his Indian Citizenship under clause (ii) of sub-rule (1);

(3) In the event of an order under sub-rule (1), the person concerned, or in

the event of his death his nearest relative, shall be duly informed about the deletion

of any entry from the National Register of Indian Citizens.

Provided that any person aggrieved by the order of an authorized officer may

prefer an appeal against such order to the Authority within a period of thirty days of

such order.

(4) The appeal under sub-rule (3) shall be disposed off, after giving to the

appellant an opportunity of being heard, and produce any documentary or oral

evidence in support of his claim.

11. Maintenance and updating of National Register of Indian Citizens. – (1) The

Registrar General of Citizen Registration shall cause to maintain the National

Register of Indian Citizens in electronic or some other form which shall entail its

continuous updating on the basis of extracts from various Registers specified under

the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969 (18 of 1969) and the Act.

[PAGE 7]
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the head of each and every family to ensure

that any event of birth or death occurring in the family has been duly entered in, or

deleted from, the Local Register of Indian Citizens.

(3) The Chief Registrar of Births and Deaths and all other officials engaged in the

registration of births and deaths shall assist the Registrar General of Citizen

Registration in updating the National Register of Indian Citizens as required under

sub-rule (1).

12. Modification of entries in National Register of Indian Citizens. – The Sub-district

or Taluk Registrar may, on an application made by the concerned person and after

due verification, authorize the modification of any entry in respect of the following

particulars in National Register of Indian Citizens, namely:-

(a) change of name; or

(b) the name of the applicant’s parent in case his status has been altered

by adoption under the relevant laws; or

(c) change of residential address; or

(d) change of marital status; or

(e) change of sex.

13. Issue of National Identity Cards. – The Registrar General of Citizen

Registration, or any officer authorised by him in this behalf, shall issue the National

Identity Card to every Citizen whose particulars are entered in the National Register

of Indian Citizens under sub-rule (3) of rule 3.

14. National Identity Cards to be Government property and responsibility of Citizens

to keep them properly. – (1) The National Identity Card shall be the property of the

Central Government.

(2) No person shall willfully destroy, alter, transfer or use in any form the National

Identity Card, except for the lawful purposes.

(3) On the happening of any of the events specified under sub-rule (1) of rule 10,

the National Identity Card shall be surrendered, by the Citizen concerned or his

nearest relative, as the case may be, to the Registrar General of Citizen Registration

or any other authorized officer acting on his behalf.

(4) In the event of a loss of the National Identity Card, it shall be the duty of the

Citizen or his nearest relative, as the case may be, to report the matter immediately

to the nearest police station and the concerned Authority.

[PAGE 8]
15. Designation of National Registration Authority and officers. – (1) On and from

the date of commencement of these rules, the Registrar General, India shall be

designated as the Registrar General of Citizen Registration, India who shall also

function as such for the purposes of these rules.

(2) The Central Government may designate –

(a) one or more officers as Additional or Joint or Deputy Registrar

General of Citizen Registration and such other officers and staff

as may be required; and

(b) an officer as a Director, and one or more officers as Joint Director,

Deputy Director, Assistant Director of Citizen Registration for

each of the States and the Union territories along with requisite

support staff, to assist the Registrar General of Citizen

Registration in discharging the functions and responsibilities

under these rules,

(3) The State Government shall notify a State Co-ordinator of National

Registration not below the rank of a Secretary in the State Government or

equivalent.

16. Supervision and Control of Registrar General of Citizen Registration over

District, Sub-district or Taluk and Local Registrars of Citizen Registration. – (1)

The State Government shall designate an officer or a person as Local

Registrar of Citizen Registration for each lowest geographical jurisdiction, that is to

say, of a village or rural area or town, or ward or demarcated area (demarcated by

the Registrar General of Citizen Registration) within a ward in a town or urban area

who shall function as Local Registrar for the purpose of preparation of Local

Register of Indian Citizens.

(2) Every Local Registrar of Citizen Registration shall function under the

overall supervision of the Sub-district or Taluk Registrar of Citizen Registration.

(3) Every Sub-district or Taluk Registrar of Citizen Registration shall

function under the overall supervision of the District Registrar of Citizen Registration.

(4) For the purposes of implementing and carrying out the provisions of these

rules, the District Registrar, the Sub-district or Taluk Registrar and the Local

Registrar of Citizen Registration shall be under the supervision and control of the

Registrar General of Citizen Registration.

(5) The Registrar General of Citizen Registration or any officer authorized by him

at any time may call for any records for examination, and issue directions regarding

inclusion or exclusion of any individual or family particulars from the Population

[PAGE 9]
Register or Local Register of Indian Citizens, to the District Registrar, the Sub-district

or Taluk Registrar and the Local Registrar of Citizen Registration.

17. Penal consequences in certain cases. - Any violation of provisions of rules 5,

7, 8, 10, 11 and 14 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand

rupees.

18. Guidelines for collection of particulars of individuals, verification, issue of

National Identity Cards, etc. - The Registrar General of Citizen Registration may, in

consultation with the Central Government, issue from time to time such guidelines to

the State Governments as are considered necessary for implementation of these

rules.

[F.No.26011/2/2003-IC.I]
PRAVIN SRIVASTAVA, Jt. Secy.

Note: The Principal rules were published in the Gazette of India vide number SRO 1574,

dated 7-7-1956 and subsequently amended vide number:

1. 2/13/57-IC dated 16-5-58

2. 10/3/58-IC dated 19-11-58

3. 2/11/58-IC dated 31-1-59

4. 2/1/60-IC dated 16-9-60

5. 1/1/62-IC dated 20-12-62

6. 1/1/64-IC dated 3-3-65

7. 24/161(ii)/64-IC dated 5-5-65

8. 2/1/66-IC dated 29-5-67

9. 2/1/68-IC dated 12-11-68

10. 2/1/69-IC dated 14-5-69

11. 2/7/69-IC dated 19-12-69

12. 24/75/69-IC dated 28-8-70

13. 26011/1/71-IC dated 9-8-71

14. 26011/12/(i)/71-IC dated 15-2-72

15. GSR 383(E) dated 5-6-81

16. GSR 25(E) dated 15-1-86

17. GSR 567(E) dated 1-4-86

18. GSR 18(E) dated 7-1-87

19. GSR 392(E) dated 13-4-87, and

20. GSR 141(E) dated 19-3-98

21. GSR 344(E) dated 20-4-2000