[PAGE 1]
| (aM I1—aves 3(ii) J FT Al UIA : AAR ay *
(6) erage fet shar aaa Te wires arate 4 fa pra + frre w fret wees are Pte +
fax Ger eM |
[WL . 13/4/2013-at UST H(A HU Tg) ]
san fae aetad, HA
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
(Department of Border Management)
(LAND PORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA) ,
NOTIFICATION
| New Delhi, the 15th July, 2013
S.0. 2186(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section 35 of the Land
Ports Authority of India Act, 2010 (31 of 2010), the Land Ports Authority of India with the approval of the Central .
Government, hereby makes the following regulations, namely:— :
1. Short title and commencement.— (1) These regulations may be called the Land Ports Authority of India ©
(Transaction of Businees) Regulations, 2013.
(2) They shall come into force from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions.— (1) In these regulations, unless the context otherwise reguires.—
(a) “Act” means the Land Ports Authority of India Act, 2010 (31 of 2010); .
(b) “Authority” means the Land Ports Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the Act;
(c) “Chairperson” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (b) of section 2 of the Act;
| (d) “Member” means a member of the Authority.
| '
| (2) Words and expression unsed herein and not defined, but defined in the Act, shall have the same meanings
| respectively assigned to them in the Act.
3. Time and place of meeting of the Authority (1) The Authority shall meet at its headquarter at Delhi or at the
location of Intergrated Check Post or at any other place as the Chairperson may determine.

| ‘ (2) The Authority shall meet at least once in three months.

(3) The Chairperson, if for any reason, is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority, any other whole-time
| Member chosen by the Members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.

(4) All issues placed before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority of the members present
and voting, and in the event of a tie, the Chairperson, or in his absence the person presiding shall have and exercise a casting vote.

4. Power to call a meeting of the Authority— (1) The Chairperson may, at any time, call a meeting of the
_Authority.
(2) The Chairperson shall call a meeting if a requisition for that purpose is presented to him in writing by not
| less than five members specifying the subject of the meeting proposed to be called.
5. Notice for meeting.— (1) The Authority shall give not less than ten clear days notice of every meeting, other
than an adjourned meeting, to each member who is for the time being in India. 5
|
| (2)A notice may be served upon a Member either personally or electronically including fax, e-mail or by post
or courier addressed to such Member or by any such means of communication as deemed fit.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-regulation (2) any omission to give any such notice to any of

[PAGE 2]
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY Se [Part II-—Sec. 3¢ii)}
the members shall not invalidate any resolution passed at any such meeting.

(4) Notwithstanding anyting contained in sub-regulation (1), a meeting of the Authority at which any matter
which is considered urgent by the Chairperson has to be taken, may be called at a shorter notice.

6. Quorum.— (1) No business shall be transacted in meeting of the Authority unless there are at least one fourth
of the total members present in such meeting and no vacant post of member shall be counted for the purposes of quorum.

7. Adjournment of meeting.— (1) The Chairperson may, with the consent of the members present at any meeting.
of the Authority, adjourn the meeting from time to time. ‘

(2) No business other than that which is included in the agenda shall be transacted at any such adjourned
meeting except with the consent of the Chairperson.

8. Transaction of business by circulation of papers.— (1) Any business which it may be necessary for the
Authority to transact may, if the Chairperson directs, be dealt with by circulation of papers without prejudice to the
confidentially of the matter, among all the members for the time being in India at their usual address, and any resolution so
circulated and approved by a majority of the members signing, shall be as effective and binding as if the resolution +had
been passed at meeting of the Authority. :

(2) Every resolution approved under sub-regulation (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is approved

“before the next ordinary meeting of the Authority, and ifthe Authority agrees in making any modification in the resolution

or the Authority agrees that the resolution should not be ratified, the resolution shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or non-ratification shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that resolution. ‘

(3) When any business is so referred to the members by circulation, a period of not less than ten and not more
than thirty clear days shall be allowed for the receipt of replies from the members, such period to be counted from the. .
date on which the notice of business is issued.

j (4) Ifa resolution is circulated, the result of circulation shall be communicated to all members.

9. Minutes of the meeting.— (1) The draft minutes ofeach meeting shall be prepared under the direction of the
person presiding over the meeting within seven working days of the date of the meeting and shall thereafter be forthwith
circulated to all Members.

(2) The proceedings of every meeting prepared in accordance with sub-regulation (1) shall be placed at the
next meeting of the Authority held after the meeting to which the minutes relate. ;

BES
(3) The suggestion or comments as may be received from Members shall be considered at the meeting where the
: minutes are placed before it.

(4) Any action taken pursuant to the minutes, prior to placement, shall not be rendered invalid.

(5) The minutes recording the proceedings at every meeting of the Authority and the names of the Members
present there at shall be entered in the Minutes folio and signed by the person presiding.

(6) The Minutes folio shall be open for inspection by any Member of the Authority without payment at the office of the Authority at all reasonable times.

, [ F. No. 13/4/2013-BADP(LPAI)]
: YUDHVIR SINGH SHAHRAWAT, Chairman
lel ee ee se Se Se
Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.