[PAGE 1]
r
g red He Sb Te—(TH)04/0007/2003--08 - “REGISTERED No. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—08 -
[ en vamewiunmenansane Cs a
| Che Gazette of Fudia
EXTRAORDINAR,
; Wi W— we 1 ;
PART {1 -— Section | ,
: - PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY ,
a —— ag ———————— ————— — =
We 44] 7 ferett, quar, fear 31, 2003/88 10, 1930
No. 44] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 31, 2008 / PAUSA 10, 1930
a wT fe pS ten ot ont 8 rad fe ae ora dearer B wT A Te Tae
Separate paging Is given to this Part In order that if may be filed as a separate compilation, :
————EEEE —= SERRE Ea R REN eee ees
. . ; MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
, . * (Legisiati-¢ Depariiner:s)
; "New Dethi, the 31st Dece:iber 2008/Pausa 10, 1930 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
. ; 31st December, 2008 and is hereby publishéd for general information: —
THE UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (“REVENTION)
AMENDMENT ACT, 2008
. No. 35 oF 2008 ;
" [31st December, 2008,]
. AnAct further to amend the Unlawtul Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Fifly-ninth Year of te Republic of Indiaas follows—
1, This Act may be called the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Act, 2008, Short title.
}. In the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the Insertion of
; ; 37 of 1969 principal Act), after long title and before the cnacting forniula, the following preamble shalt Preamble.
be inserted, namely: — Pos
, “WueRgas the Security Council of the United Nations in its 4385th meeting .
adopted Resolution 1373 (2001) on 28th September, 2001, under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations requiring all the Stutes to take Measures to combat :
oe international terrorism;

[PAGE 2]
2 “THB GAZETTE OF [NDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ [Parti aa
SS A eee myn easane . Ay
AND WHEREAS Resolutions 1267 (1999), 1333 (2000), 1363 (2001), 1390 (2002), 1455 ‘ or
(2003), 1526 (2004), 1566 (2004), 1617 (2005), 1735 (2006) and 18222008) ofthe Security ot
m Council of the United Nations.require the States to take action against certain terrorists "OU
and terrorist-organisations, to freeze the assets and other economic resources, to ;
‘prevent the entry into or the transit through their territory, and prevent the direct or
indirect supply, sale or transfer of arms and ammiunitions to the individuals or entities
‘listed in the Schedule; ; .
AND witereas the Central Government, in exercise of the powers conferred by
section 2 ofthe United Nations (Seeurity Council) Act, 1947 has made the Prevention 43 of 1947.
and Suppression of Terrorism (Implementation of Security Council Resolutions)
Order, 2007;
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the said Resolutions
and the Order and to make special provisions for the prevention of, and for coping
with, terrorist activities and for matters connected therewith or incidental! thereto.”.
Amendmeal 3. In section 2 of the principal Act,—
of section 2. .
; ; (/) in clause (@), the words “and includes a Special Court constituted under
section 11 or under section 21 of the National Investigation Agency Act, 2008;” shall
be inserted at the end; :
Y , , (i) after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:
“(ea} “Order” means the Prevention and Suppression of Terrorisin
(implementation of Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007, as may be amended
from time to tiine;’; :
(iif) in clause (g), afler the words “for the purpose of a terrorist organisation”,
the words “or terrorist gang” shal! be inserted at the end: .
(iv) for clause (/), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— ;
. ‘(h) "property" means property and assets of every description whether
corporcal or incorporea!, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and legal
doeuments, deecls and instruments in any form including electronic or digital,
evidencing title to, or interest in; such property or assets by means of bank
credits, travellers’ cheques, bank cheques, money orders, shares, securities,
bonds, drafs, letters of credit, cash and bank account including fund, however
acquired; -
(ha) “Schedule” means the Schedule to this Acts’.
Substitution af 4. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, .
hew section, namely:— .
for section 15.
Terrorist act, “15, Whoever does any act with intent to threaten or likely to threaten the unity,
. integrity, security or sovereignty of India or with intent to strike terror or likely to strike
: . ‘terror in the people or any section of the people in India or in any foreign country,—
(a) by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable
substances or firearms or other fethal weapons or poisonous or noxious gases
> or other chemicals or by any other substances (whether biological radioactive,
i nuclear or otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other means of whatever
nature lo cause or likely to cause-—
(i) death of, or injuries to, any person or persons; or
(if) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of, property; or
: (iii) disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the
> community in India or in any foreign country; or

[PAGE 3]
. / Sel] _____“THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ED
i (iv) damage or destruction of any property in India or in g: foreign sO
j- ‘ country used or intended to be used ‘for the defence of India or in 7
j fee te connection with anyother purposes of the Government of India, any State
/ . -. ° Government or any of their agencies; or oO ;
/ ; (2) overawes by means of criminal force or the show of criminal force or ‘
/ . attempts to do so or causes death of any public functionary or attempts to ‘
/ Cause death of any public functionary; or - : .
i . (c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and threatens to kill or injure
/ ; such person or does any other act in order to compel the Government of India,
i any Stats Government or the Government of a foreign country or any other
/ person to do or abstain from doing any act, : .
j . commits a terrorist act, ,
E Explanation—For the purpose of this section, public functionary means the
F constitutional authorities and any other functionary notified in the Official Gazette by
é the Central Government as a public functionary.”, ,
= 5. After section 16 of the principal Act, the following section Shall, be inserted, Insedtion of new
namely;— ‘ section 164. ;
f “16A. Whoever intentionally, by use of force or threat of use of force or by any Punishment
: other means, demands any bomb, dynamite or other explosive substance oF inflammable a cats
substances or fire arms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or noxious or other radigncthn .
"chemicals or any biological, radiological, nuclear material or device, with the intentlon substances,
of aiding, abetting or committing a terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment nuclear
for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be lable to fine,” devices, ete,
6. For section 17 of the principal Act, the following section shall. be Substituted, Substitution of
, namely;— . new section _ ,
. . : for section 17,
- “17. Whoever, in India or in a foreign country, directly or indirectly, raises or Punishment
Collects funds or Provides finds to any person or persons or attempts to provide for raising
funds to any person or persons, knowing that such funds are likely to be used by such eee
Person oF persons to commit a terrorist act, notwithstanding whether such funds were
actually used or not for commission of such act, shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which shail not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment
. for life, and shall also be Hable to fine.”,
7. Int section 18 of the principal Act, for the words “incites or knowingly facilitates”, Amendment of
the words “incites, directs or knowingly facilitates” shall be substituted, : Section 18,
‘ 8, After section 18 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, Insertion of
namely:-— : : new sections
. . . 18A and 18B.
“I8A. Whoever organises or causes to be organised any camp or camps for Punishment
imparting training in terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which a Polar
. Shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and camps
shail also be liable to fine. ‘
” 18B, Whoever recruits or causes to be recruited any person or persons for Punishment
commission of a terrosist act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which a reer vin
Shall not be less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and or penis fe
shall also be Hable to fine.” terrorist act, .
9. In section 23 of the principal Act, — Amendment of ‘
. . section 23,
‘(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “If any person with intent to aid any :
7 terrorist contravenes", the words “If any person with intent to aid any terrorist or a
terrorist organisation or g terrorist gang contravenes" shall be substituted, |

[PAGE 4]
4 _;THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (PASM
. (6) in sub-section (2), for the words “Any person who, with the intent to aid any - =
; fer terrorist”, the words “Any person who with tho intent t@ ald any terrorist, or a terrorist * >
. organisation or a terrorist gang” shall be substituted. ; es
Amendment 10. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after the words “proceeds of : =
of section 24. terrorism whether held by a terrorist or”, the words “terrorist organisation or terrorist gang BO
or” shall be inserted, _—
Amendment of 11, In section 25of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), in the Explanation; after a
section 25. clause-(c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— a
' : “(ea) creditior debit cards or cards that serve a similar purpose;”; 5 |
Insertion of 12. After section;43 of the princtpal Act, the following sections shail be inserted, ,
new seciions namely:— i .
43A to 438. .
Power to ‘43A. Any, officer of the Designated Authority empowered In this behaif, by
arresi, search, general of special order of the Central Government or the State Government, as the ‘
ele. case may be, knowing of a design to commit any offence.under this Act or has reason
to believe from personal knowledge or information given by any person and taken in ‘
, ; writing that any person has committed an offence punishable under this Act or from
any document, article or any other thing which may furnish evidence of the
; commission of.such offence or from any illegally acquired property or any document
- or other article which may furnish evidence of holding any illegally acquired property
which is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture under this Chapter is kept or concealed
in any building, conveyance or place, may authorise any officer subordinate to him to
; arrest such @ person or search such building, cotveyance or place whether by day or
by night or himself'arrest such a person‘or search a such building, conveyance or
place. o -,
Procedure of 43B. (2) Any officer arresting a person under section 43 shall, as soon as may
arrest, seizure, be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest. : .
ele. yo. oo |
. (2) Every person arrested and article seized under section 43A shall be forwarded
without unnecessary delay to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station. .
: ; a (3) The authority or officer to whom any person or-article is forwarded under
sub-section (2). shall, with all convenient dispatch, take such measures as may be
necessary in accordance with the provisions of the Code.
Application of 43C. The provisions ofthe Code shail.apply, insofar as they are not inconsistent
provisions of with the provisions of this Act, to all arrests, searches and seizures made under this .
one. ; Act, a
Modified appli- 43D, (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or any other law, :
eation of every offencd unishable under this Act shali be deemed to be a cognizable offence
provisions of ‘within the méaning of clause (c) of section’2 of the Code, and “cognizable case” as
the Cade. defined in that Clause shal] be construed accordingly,
. : (2) Section‘l67 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving ari offence .
. punishable under’ this Act subject to the modification that in sub-section (2),— .
(a) the references to "fifteen days", "ninety-days” and "sixty days",
‘ wherever they occur, shall be construed as references to "thirty days", "ninety |
. days” and “ninety days” respectively; and , |
(6).after the proviso, the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:— |
, ” Provided further that if it is not possible to complete the |
investigation within the said period of ninety days, the Court may if it is
n satisfied with the report of the Public Prosecutor indicating the progress
“ of the investigation and the specific reasons for the detention of the
roy accused beyond the said period of ninety days, extend the sald period up
° to one-hundred and eighty days:

[PAGE 5]
oe fi ——— CLL Sei CT Ip) Ina So ee
Fs i F . Provided algo that {fit police cificey making thy investigation und-:
3 i : this Aci, requests, for’ the purposes of investigatlon, for police custody”
: aa from judiciul custody of any person in judictal custody, he shall file an
i Z a{lidavit stating the reasons for doing so and shall also explain the delay,
# -_ if any, for requesting such. pulice custody.", ;
a (3) Section 268 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving an offence
, , punishable undcr this Act subject to the modification that— ‘ ;
; (2) the reference in sub-section (/) thereof— :
. J ; (i) to “the State Government” shall be construed as a reference to
; “the Central Government or chy State Government.) . ;
i . (ii) to “order of the State Government” shall be construed as a
: reference to “order of the Cential Government or the State Government, as
q the case may be"; and .
Y ; ' (4) the reference in sub-section (2) thereof, tu “the State Government"
J shall be construed as a reference to “the Central Government or the State
j Government, is the case may be".
. . (A) Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply inzelation to any case involving
the arrest of any person accused of having committed an offence punishable under
this Act. :
t
: (3) Notwithstanding enything contained in the Code, no person avcused of an
offence pimishahle under Chapters TV and YL ofthis Act shall, if in custody, be released
: on bail or on his own bond unless the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity
of beirs: heard on the application for such release:
, Provided that such accused person shiall not be released on bail or on his own
bond if the Cowl, on a perusal of the case diary or the report made under section 173
of the Code is of the opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
A ¢ o “oe, ee
accusution against Such person is primu facie (uc. * ;
: ; (ay ‘fie restricrions on granting of bail specified In suls-section (5) is in addition
| to the restrictions under'the Code or any other Jaw for the time being in force on .
granting oPbul.
od (7) "Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (5) and (6), no bail
: shall be grarited to 8 person accused of an offence punishable under this Act, if he is
! not an Indian citizen and has entered the country unauthor{sedly or SHegally except In
, ‘ very exccptiqnal circumstances and for reasons 10 be recorded in writing.
: . 439, In a prosecution for an offence under section 15, if it is proved — Presumption
. ' hs wot my . as to offence
q (q) that the armns or explosives or any other substances specified in the - under sectior
j said section were recovered from: the possession of the accused and there Is 15.
; ; reason to belivve that such arms or explosives or other substances of a similar - ‘
a nature were used in the commission of such offence; or -
. : (8) that by the evidence of the expert the finger-prints of the accused or
i any other definitive evidence suggesting the involvement of the accused in the
offence were found atthe site of the offence or on anything including arms and
| vehicles used in connection with the commnission of such offence, ;
; ‘the Court shall presume, unless the contrary is shown, that the accused has committed
i . such offence.
3 43F. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained In any other law, the officer Obligation 1
investigating any offence under this Act, with the prior approval in writing ct an pee sion
; officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police, may require any officer or

[PAGE 6]
sat j 6 _ {HE-GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ Packt b “4
/ authority of the Central Goverriment-or a State Government or 8 local, authority or
; a bank, or accompany, or 4 firm or any other institution, establishment, organisation a
i. or any individual to furnish information in his or Its possession In relation to such °
é offence, on points or matters, where the Investigating officer has reason to believe 3
f hr _ 7 that such information will be useful for, or relevant to, the purposes of this Act. .
é ' . as }
t (2) The failure to furnish the information called for under sub-section (/), or .
' deliberately furnishing faise information shail be punishabie with imprisonment ;
, _ fora term which may extend to three years or with fine or with both. .
. (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an offence under sub-
! section (2) shali be tried as a summary case and the procedure prescribed in
: Chapter XXI of the sald Code {except sub-section-(2) of section 262] shall be : .
; applicable thereto.’.
‘ Amendment of 13. Section 45 of the principal Act shall be renumbered as sub-section (/) thereof ,
" section 45. and after sub-section (7) as 80 renumbered, the foliowing sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:— . oo.
f | *(2) Sanction for prosecution under sub-section (7) shall be given within such
| time as may be prescribed only after considering the report ofsuch authority appointed
by the Central Government or, as the case may be, the State Government which chall
; make an Independent review of the evidence gathered in the course of investigation
. . and make a‘recommendation, within such tlme as may be prescribed, to the Central
Government or, as the case may be, the State Government... ° ‘
Insertion of new 14, After section 51 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
‘seclion S1A. namely:— a
Certain powers ' 451A, For the prevention of, and for coping with terrorist activities, the Central
er the Central Government shali have power to—
: overnment. . ‘.
. (a) freeze, seize or attach funds and other financial assets or economic
; resources held by, on behalf of or at the direction of the individuals or entities
. listed in the Schedule to the Order, or any other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;
; (b) prohibit any individual or entity from making any funds, financial assets .
or economic’ resources or related services available for the benefit of the
f indeiduals or ehtities listed in the Schedule to the Ordér or any other person
Bi: ~ engaget = of suspected to be engaged in terrorism;
(c) prevent the entry into or the transit through India of individuals listed
In the Schedule” to the Order or any other person engaged in or suspected to be
engaged tn térrorism.”. . . :
Amendment . 15.18 section 52 pf the principai Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (e), the following
of-section 52. gJause shall be inserted,:namely:— -
“(ee) the time within which sanction for prosecution and reco mmendation to the ,
Central Governmént shall be given under sub-section (2) of section 45, and”. ,
Amendment =. 16, Section 53 of the principalAct, shall be renumbered as sub-section (7) thereof and :
of section 53.* after sub-section as 86 fentiinbered, the following sub-section shail be inserted, namely:—
"(2) The Order referred to-in entry 33 of the Schedule and every amendment
made to that Order shall be Jald as soon as may be after it ls made before each House
bi of Parllament while itis in session for a total period of 30 days which may be comprised
a in one session or‘In two or more successive sessions.”.

[PAGE 7]
an » Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7.
i 3 17, In the Schedule to the principal Act after entry-32, the following entry shal] be Amendment
& i inserted, namely:— ote ~ : sof Schedule.
i _— “33. Organisations listed in the Schedule to the U.N, Prevention and Suppression
gf 4 : __ of Terrorism (implementation of Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007 made under.
as @ 43 of 1947, _ Section 2 of the United Nations (Security Council) Act, 1947 and amended from time - :
i F : totime.”. oo...
. : : : ; , Secy, to the Gavi. af India.
sccm er re nen en " —
++ PRINTED BY THE GENGRAL MANAGER, GOVT, OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2008.
GMGIPMRND—4814GI (8-5}—01-01-2008,