[PAGE 1]
foe lan
~ FNoUL(1)/2014-LI 0°
, ’ Government of India -
: Ministry of Law and Justice
oO - -Legislative Department .
4" Floor, Shastri Bhawan
New Delhi, the 8"" December, 2014
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
; Subject:-Proposal to Repeal the Amending Acts -regarding
The undersigned is directed to refer to the Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.
T1/1501 1/5/2014-NSA, dated 1 December, 2014 regarding the subject cited above and to
forward herewith a copy of the National Security Act, 1980 (65 of 1980) modified up to 1*
December, 2014, as requested by the Ministry of Home Affairs for taking necessary action in
the matter. ;
Enel.: As above. b- |
Deputy Legislative Counsel ;
Tel. No.23389687
Ministry of Home Affairs, . .
IS-II Division, NSA-Section,
[Kind Attn.: Shri Ashish V. Gawai, US], \
NDCC-II Building, 2" Floor,
Jai Singh Road,
New Delhi-110001. «
|
OR |

[PAGE 2]
? , , ‘'C ’
; . F.No.1(19)/2014-Pub.
Government of India
Ministry of Law and Justice
. Legislative Department ; .
Publication Section
, New Delhi, the 2" December, 2014.
| | —s
, NOTE
Subject:- Modified Edition of National Security Amendment Act, 1980 (65 of 1980).
; Legislative-1 Section may kindly refer to their Dy. No.

2017/2014/L.1(LD) dated 1" Dercember, 2014 on the subject cited above.

2. .° VAs. ~.copy of National Security Amendment Act, 1980 (65 of 1980) as modified
upto 1 December, 2014 is enclosed herewith for necessary action.

. (Renu Sinha) 5 |i2fig.
Assistant Legislative Counsel
Enc: he abpue . (Branch Officer)
Legislative-1 Section
one
Bes
TAS
wae

[PAGE 3]
(Op
: |
]
THE NATIONAL SECURITY ACT, 1980
(65 OF 1980)
. (As modified up to the lst December, 2014)
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
; Ministry of Law and Justice

[PAGE 4]
A
LIST OF AMENDING ACTS
1. The National Security (Amendment) Act, 1984 (24 of 1984).
2. The National Security (Amendment) Act, 1984 (60 of 1984).
3. The National Security (Amendment) Act, 1985 (23 of 1985).
4. The National Security (Amendment) Act, 1987 (27 of 1987). |
5. The National Security (Amendment) Act, 1988 (43 of 1988) . . |
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED
cl. : : . : : Jor Clause.
Ins. : , . . : : » Jnserted. ,
Ord. : : : : : » Ordinance.
P. . : . : . . ” Page.
Pt. : . : : : » Part.
Reg. : : : . : » Regulation.
Rep. . . . : . » Repealed.
Ss. . : : : : » Sections.
s. : - . : : : » section.
Sch. : : : . . » Schedule.
Subs... : . : : » Substituted.
wef. : : . : » with effect from.

[PAGE 5]
, THE NATIONAL SECURITY ACT, 1980
No. 65 of 1980 ,
. [27th December, 1980]

An Act to provide for preventive detention in certain cases and for matters connected therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. Short title and extent—(J) This Act may be called the National Security Act, 1980.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

2. Definitions.—(/) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) "appropriate Government" means, as respects a detention order made by the Central
Government or a person detained under such order, the Central Government, and as respect a
detention order made by a State Government or by an officer subordinate to a State Government or
as respects a person detained under such order, the State Government;

(6) "detention order means an order made under section 3;

(c) "foreigner" has the same meaning as the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946);

. (d) "person" includes a foreigner;

(e) "State Government", in relation to a Union territory, means the administrator thereof.

: 3. Power to make orders detaining certain persons.—(/) The Central Government or the State
Government may,—

(a) if satisfied with respect to any person that with a view to preventing him from acting in
any manner prejudicial to the defence of India, the relations of India with foreign powers, or the
security of India, or

(b) if satisfied with respect to any foreigner that with a view to regulating his continued
presence in India or with a view to making arrangements for his expulsion from India,

it is necessary so to do, make an order directing that such person be detained.

(2) The Central Government or the State Government may, if satisfied with respect to any person that
with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State or from acting in
any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order or from acting in any manner prejudicial to the
maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community it is necessary so to do, make an order directing
that such person be detained. ;

Explanation—For the purposes of this sub-section, “acting in any manner prejudicial to the |
maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community" does not include “acting in any manner |
prejudicial to the maintenance of supplies of commodities essential to the community" as defined in the
Explanation to sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Prevention of Blackmarketing and Maintenance of Supplies of
Essential Commodities Act, 1980 (7 of 1980), and accordingly, no order of detention shall be made under this
Act on any ground on which an order of detention may be made under that Act. :

(3) If, having regard to the circumstances prevailing or likely to prevail in any area within the local
limits of the jurisdiction of a District Magistrate or a Commissioner of Police, the State Government is satisfied
that it is necessary so to do, it may, by order in writing, direct, that during such period as may be specified in the
order, such District Magistrate or Commissioner of Police may also, if satisfied as provided in sub-section (2),
exercise the powers conferred by the said sub-section:

; Provided that the period specified in an order made by the State Government under this sub-section
shall not, in the first instance, exceed three months, but the State Government may, if satisfied as aforesaid that it
is necessary so to do, amend such order to extend.such period from time to time by any period not exceeding
three months at any one time.

(4) When any order is made under this section by an officer mentioned in sub-section (3), he shall
forthwith report the fact to’the State Government to which he is subordinate together with the grounds on which
the order has been made and such other particulars as, in his opinion, have a bearing on the matter, and no such

[PAGE 6]
. c - + National Security .
‘(b) by order notified in the Official Gazette direct the said person to appear before such officer, at
such place and within such period as may be-specified in the order.

(2) Upon the making of a report against any person under clause (a) of sub-section (/), the provisions of
sections 82, 83, 84 and 85 of the Code of Criminal Procedure; 1973 (2 of 1974), shall apply in respect of such
person and his property as if the detention order made against him were a warrant: issued by the Magistrate.

(3) If any person fails to comply with an order issued under clause (5) of sub-section (/) He shall, unless
he proves that it was not possible for him to comply therewith and that he had, within the period specified in the
order, informed the officer mentioned in the order of the reason which rendered compliance therewith impossible
and of his whereabouts, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine,
or with both. : .

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every
offence under sub-section (3) shall be cognizable.

8. Grounds of order of detention to be disclosed to persons affected by the order.—(/) When a
person is detained in pursuance of a detention order, the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be, but
ordinarily not later than five days and in exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing, not
later than ten days from the date of detention, communicate to him the grounds on which the order has been
made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order to the appropriate
Government,

(2) Nothing in sub-section (/) shall require the authority to disclose facts which it considers to be
against the public interest to disclose.

9. Constitution of Advisory Boards.——(/) The Central Government and each State Government shall,
whenever necessary, constitute one or more Advisory Boards for the purposes of this Act.

(2) Every such Board shall consist of three persons who are, or have been, or are qualified to be

; appointed, as Judges of a High Court, and such persons shall be appointed by the appropriate Government.

(3) The appropriate Government shall appoint one of the members of the Advisory Board who is, or has
been, a Judge of a High Court to be its Chairman, and in the case of a Union territory, the appointment to the
Advisory Board of any person who is a Judge of the High Court of a State shall be with the previous approval of
the State Government concerned. ,

10. Reference to Advisory Board.—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, in every case
where a detention order has been made under this Act, the appropriate Government shall, within three weeks
from the date of detention of a person under the order, place before the Advisory Board constituted by it under
section 9, the grounds on which the order has been made and the representation, if any, made by the person
affected by the order, and in case where the order has been made by an officer mentioned in sub-section (3) of
section 3, also the report by such officer under sub-section (4) of that section.

11. Procedure of Advisory Board.—(/) The Advisory Board shall, after considering the materials
placed before it and, after calling for such further information as it may deem necessary from the appropriate
Government or from any person called for the purpose through the appropriate Government or from the person
concerned, and if, in any particular case, it considers it essential so to do or if the person concerned desires to be
heard, after hearing him in person, submit its report to the appropriate Government within seven weeks from the

. date of detention of the person concerned.

(2) The report of the Advisory Board shall specify in a separate part thereof the opinion of the Advisory
Board as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person concerned.

(3) When there is a difference of opinion among the members forming the Advisory Board, the opinion
of the majority of such members shall be deemed to be the opinion of the Board.

(4) Nothing in this section shall entitle any person against whom a detention order has been made to
appear by any legal practitioner in any matter connected with the reference to the Advisory Board; and the
proceedings of the Advisory Board and its report, excepting that part of the report in which the opinion of the
Advisory Board is specified, shall be confidential.

12. Action upon the report of the Advisory Board.—(J) In any case where the Advisory Board has
reported that there is, in its opinion, sufficient cause for the detention of a person, the appropriate Government
may confirm the detention order and continue the detention of the person concerned for such period as it thinks
fit.

[PAGE 7]
’ . . . - . 5
. c National Security
(2) In the case of any person to whom sub-section (1) applies, sections 3, 8 and 10 to 14 shall have
| effect subject to the following modifications, namely:—
(a) in section 3,— . .
} ‘(@) in sub-section (4), in the proviso,—
(A) for the words "ten days", the words "fifteen days" shall be substituted;
(B) for the words "fifteen days" the words "twenty days" shall be substituted;
(if) in sub-section (5), for the words "seven days", the words “fifteen days" shall be
substituted;
(6) in section 8, in sub-section (/), for the words "ten days", the words "fifteen days" shall be
| substituted;
(c) in section 10, for the words "shall, within-three weeks", the words "shall, within four months
and two weeks" shall be substituted;
(a) in section 11,—
(A in sub-section (/), for the words "seven weeks", the words "five months and three weeks"
shall be substituted;
(fi) in sub-section (2), for the words "detention of the person concerned", the words
"continued detention of the person concerned" shall be substituted;
(e) in section 12, for the words "for the detention", at both the places where they occur, the words
"for the continued detention" shall be substituted;
: (f) in section 13, for the words "twelve months", the words "two years" shall be substituted:
(g) in section 14, in the proviso to sub-section (2), for the words "twelve months" the words "two
. years" shall be substituted.]

. 15. Temporary release of persons detained.—(/) The appropriate Government may, at any time,
direct that any person detained in pursuance of a detention order may be released for any specified period either
without conditions or upon such conditions specified in the direction as that person accepts, and may, at any .
time, cancel his release.
~ “(2yIn directing the rélease of atiy person under“sub-séction (7), ‘the appropriate Government may
require him to enter into a bond with or without sureties for the due observance of the conditions specified in the
direction.

(3) Any person released under sub-section (/) shall surrender himself at the time and place, and to the
authority, specified in the order directing his release or cancelling his release, as the case may be.

(4) If any person, fails without sufficient cause, to surrender himself in the manner specified in subsection (3), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or
with both. : ,

(5) If any person released under sub-section (J) fails to fulfil any of the conditions imposed upon him
under the said sub-section or in the bond entered into by him, the bond shall be declared to be forfeited and any
person bound thereby shall be liable to pay the penalty thereof.

16. Protection of action taken in good faith—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the
Central Government or a State Government, and no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
any person, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.

17. Act not to have effect with respect to detentions under State laws—(/) Nothing in this Act
shall apply or have any effect with respect to orders of detention, made under any State law, which are in force
immediately before the commencement of the National Security Ordinance, 1980 (Ord. 11 of 1980), and
accordingly every person in respect of whom an order of detention made under any State law is in force

[PAGE 8]
: é
Wat Ho Sto Weo-33004/99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99
ob aa fog, nn Bm ise
aTereMcat . .
EXTRAORDINARY 3
WT Tavs 3— SOAS (ii) j
PART I—Section 3—Sub-section (ii)
wife & weniger
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY |
Soon !!UTUT
@ 2021) ag feeci, UA, SATET 12, 2016/sITAUT 21, 1938
No. 2021] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 12, 2016/SRAVANA 21, 1938 1
: :
Te Face ;
ag fecel, 10 arTe, 2016
PL, 2700(8) Sata aE wea Ten aa, 1980 (1980 @r 65) tame 9 ERT ved aaa a walt at
By, WaEGR aS 1 Tos ech & athe Prefer afte at seer ate ar arener ate weer gaa wet & aera =
1 ARTS area st dole gar see;
2 area earraft oft crete ser ae,
3. Ae coreg stadt etter elie werrer UR,
[OL . 1/15011 /07 / 2015 AT]
{
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS ;
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 10th August, 2016
S.O. 2700(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 9 of the National Security Act, 1980 (65 of
!980). the Central Government hereby constitutes the Advisory Board and appoints the following persons as Chairman
und Members of the said Board or, namel y:—
1. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjiv Khanna , — Chairman;
2. Hon’ble Mr. Justice Jayant Nath —Member;
3. Hon‘ble Ms. Justice Sangita Dhingra Sehgal —Member. .
, [F. No. II/15011/07/2015-NSA]
MUKESH MITTAL, Jt. Secy.
3998 GI/2016
oo Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-1 10064 —
: and Published by the Controller of Publications, Dethi-110054.