[PAGE 1]
jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—19 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—19

vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

lañ 68] ubZ fnYyh] lkseokj] fnlEcj 09] 2019@vxzgk;.k 18] 1941 ¼'kd½
No. 68] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, DECEMBER 09, 2019/AGRAHAYANA 18, 1941 (SAKA)

bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.

MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)

New Delhi, the 9th December, 2019/Agrahayana 18, 1941 (Saka)

The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
9th December, 2019, and is hereby published for general information:—

THE DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI AND DAMAN AND DIU
(MERGER OF UNION TERRITORIES) ACT, 2019
NO. 44 OF 2019
[9th December, 2019.]

An Act to provide for merger of Union territories of Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Daman and Diu and for matters connected therewith.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—

PART I

PRELIMINARY

1. (1) This Act may be called the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu Short title and
(Merger of Union territories) Act, 2019. commencement.

[PAGE 2]
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “appointed day” means the day on which the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint;

(b) “existing Union territories” means the Union territories of Dadra and
Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu as existing immediately before the appointed
day;

(c) “law” includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law,
rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having a force of law in the whole
or in any part of the existing Union territories immediately before the appointed
day.

PART II

MERGER OF UNION TERRITORIES

Formation of 3. On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new Union territory to
Union be known as the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu
territory of
Dadra and comprising the territory of the existing Union territories, namely:—
Nagar Haveli
and Daman Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu,
and Diu.
and thereupon the said territories shall have ceased to form part of the existing Union
territories.

Amendment 4. In article 240 of the Constitution, in clause (1),—
of article 240
of (i) for entry (c), the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
Constitution.
“(c) Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu;”;

(ii) entry (d) shall be omitted.

Amendment 5. On and from the appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Constitution, under
of First the heading “II. THE UNION TERRITORIES”, for entries 4 and 5 and the corresponding
Schedule to
entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely:—Constitution.

Name Extent

“4. Dadra and Nagar Haveli The territory which immediately
and Daman and Diu before the eleventh day of August,
1961 was comprised in Free Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and the
territories specified in section 4
of the Goa, Daman and Diu
Reorganisation Act, 1987.”. 18 of 1987.

PART III

REPRESENTATION IN THE HOUSE OF THE PEOPLE

Allocation of 6. On and from the appointed day, there shall be allocated two seats to the Union
seats in territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu in the House of the People and
House of
the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed to be 43 of 1950.People.
amended accordingly.

Provisions as 7. (1) Every sitting members of the House of the People representing any
to sitting Parliamentary constituency, which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions
members.
of section 5, stands allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, be deemed to
have been elected to that House by that constituency.

[PAGE 3]
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section “parliamentary constituency”
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Representation of the People
43 of 1950. Act, 1950.

(2) The term of office of such members shall remain unaltered.

PART IV

HIGH COURT

8. On and from the appointed day, the jurisdiction of the High Court of Bombay Extension of
shall continue to extend to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman jurisdiction
of High Court
and Diu. of Bombay.
PART V

ASSETS AND LIABILITIES

9. Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles and Land and
other goods held immediately before the appointed day, by the existing Union territories, goods.
shall, on and from that day, vest in the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and
Daman and Diu.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “land” includes
immovable property of every kind and any rights in or over such property and the
expression “goods” does not include coins, bank notes and currency notes.

10.The total of the cash balances in all treasuries, the Reserve Bank of India, the Cash
State Bank of India and any nationalised bank, of the existing Union territories balances.
immediately before the appointed day shall be merged in the Union territory of Dadra
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.

11. (1) The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty (including arrears of land Arrears of
revenue) on any property situated in the existing Union territories shall vest in the tax.
Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.

(2) The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty, other than a tax or duty specified
in sub-section (1), shall belong to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and
Daman and Diu.

12. The right to recover any loans or advances made by the existing Union Right to
territories before the appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist or other recover loans
person shall belong to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and and advances.
Diu.

13.The assets and liabilities relating to any commercial undertaking of the existing Assets and
Union territories shall vest in the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman liabilities of
Union
and Diu. territory
undertakings.

14. The liability of the Union to refund— Refund of
taxes
(a) any tax or duty on property, including land revenue collected in excess collected in
shall go to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; excess.

(b) any other tax or duty collected in excess shall go to the Union territory
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.
PART VI
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES
15. The members of each of the All India Services borne on the existing Union Provisions
territories cadre immediately before the appointed day shall continue to be in the cadre relating to All
of the same service of the existing Union territory in which they stand allocated before India
Services.
the appointed day.

[PAGE 4]
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—

Provisions 16. (1) Every person employed in connection with the affairs of the existing
relating to Union territories and serving immediately before the appointed day in the existing
other
Union territories shall, on and from that day,—services.
(a) continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the Union territory of
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; and

(b) be deemed to be provisionally allotted to serve in connection with the
affairs of the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu:

Provided that nothing in clause (b) shall apply to a person to whom the
provisions of section 15 apply or to a person on deputation from any State.

(2) As soon as may be, after the appointed day, the Central Government shall by
general or special order, determine whether every person referred to in clause (b) of
sub-section (1) shall be finally allotted for service in the Union territory of Dadra and
Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu and the date with effect from which such allotment
shall take effect or be deemed to have taken effect.

(3) As soon as may be after the Central Government passes orders finally allotting
an employee in terms of sub-section (2), the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli
and Daman and Diu shall take steps to integrate the employee into the services under
its control in accordance with such special or general orders or instructions as may be
issued by the Central Government from time to time in this behalf.

(4) The Central Government may, by order establish one or more Advisory
Committees for the purpose of assisting it in regard to ensuring of fair and equitable
treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this section and proper
consideration of any representations made by such persons:

Provided that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for
the time being in force, no representation shall be against any order passed by the
competent authority on matters arising out of the division and integration of services
under this Act, on the expiry of three months from the date of publication or service of
such order, whichever is earlier:

Provided further that, notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding
proviso, the Central Government may suo motu or otherwise and for reasons to be
recorded, reopen any matter and pass such order thereon, as may appear to it to be
appropriate if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, in order to prevent any miscarriage
of justice to any affected employee.

(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, on or after the appointed
day, the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in
relation to the determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in
connection with the affairs of the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman
and Diu:

Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed
day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be
varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central
Government.

(6) All services prior to the appointed day rendered by a person allotted under
sub-section (2) in connection with the affairs of the existing Union territories shall, for
the purposes of the rules regarding his conditions of service, be deemed to have been
rendered in connection with the affairs of the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar
Haveli and Daman and Diu.

(7) The provisions of this section other than clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall
not apply in relation to any person to whom the provisions of section 16 apply.

[PAGE 5]
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5

PART VII

LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

17. All laws which immediately before the appointed day extend to, or are in force Extension of
in, existing Union territories shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to be in laws.
force in those areas in respect of which they were in force immediately before that day.

18. Any court, tribunal or authority required or empowered to enforce any law Power to
extended to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu by construe
section 17 may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in relation to the Union laws.
territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, construe the law in such
manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to
the matter before the court, tribunal or authority.

19. For the purpose of facilitating the application of any law in relation to the Power to
Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, the Central Government adapt laws.
may, before the expiration of two years from the appointed day, by order, make such
adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as
may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject
to the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a
competent Legislature or other competent authority.

20. Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing Union territories is Legal
a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities proceedings.
transferred to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu under
this Act, the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu shall be
deemed to be substituted for the existing Union territories as a party to those
proceedings, or added as a party thereto, as the case may be, and the proceedings may
continue accordingly.

21. (1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the appointed day before Transfer of
any court (other than a High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which on pending
proceeding.
that day falls within the existing Union territories shall, stand transferred to the
corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer in the Union territory of Dadra and
Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.

(2) In this section,—

(a) “proceeding” includes any suit, case or appeal; and

(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer”, in the Union
territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, means—

(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom,
the proceeding would have laid if the proceeding had been instituted after
the appointed day, or

(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority or officer in that
Union territory as may be determined after the appointed day by the
Administrator of the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman
and Diu, or before the appointed day by the existing Union territories, to be
the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “Administrator” means the
administrator appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution.

22. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding Effect of
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in provisions
inconsistent
force. with other
laws.

[PAGE 6]
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— SEC. 1]

Power to 23. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
remove President may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
difficulties.
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient
for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three years from the
appointed day.

(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.

————

DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.

UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002

signed AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054. BANSHI Digitallyby BANSHI
DHAR DHARDate: 2019.12.09DUBEY
DUBEY 22:17:26 +05'30'

MGIPMRND—4221GI(S3)—09-12-2019.