[PAGE 1]
'THE SIKH GURDWARAS BOARD ELECTION RULES, 1959
1. Short title.—These rules may be called the Sikh Gurdwaras Board
Election Rules, 1959. ‘

2. Definitions.—In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,—

(a) “Act” means the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925;

(b) “Agent” means any person appointed in writing by a candidate at

a an election to be agent for the purposes of these rules, with the
acceptance in writing by such person of the office of such agent.
whether as election agent, polling agent or counting agent:

(c) “Board”. ?[“Chief Commissioner Gurdwara Election”].
“Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections” and “Resident” shall have
the same meaning as are respectively assigned to them in the Act;

(d) “constituency” means a constituency for the election of a member
or members of the Board;

(e) “election” means an election to fill a seat or seats in the Board
and “elector”, in relation to a constituency, means a person whose
name is for the time being entered in the electoral roll of that
constituency:

(f) “form” means a form appended to these rules and includes a
translation thereof in any other language;

(g) “non-reserved seat” means a seat not reserved for Scheduled
Castes *{or for women];

(h) “reserved seat” means a seat reserved for Scheduled Castes “Lor
for women].

s
(i) “roll” means the electoral roll of a constituency: :
an Un
‘These rules were framed under section 146 of the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925, and was first
bd published with Punjab Government, Home Department {Generai Gurdwaras) Notification
No. 1207~Gurdwaras, dated the t6th July, 1959.
2Inserted.vide Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No. GS.R. 382(B), dated 26th July,
1978.
3Added.—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 278(E). dated 4th Aoril,
*Added.—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 278(E}, dated 4th April.
2002.

[PAGE 2]
(j) “Scheduled Castes” means all such castes, races or tribes or parts |
of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as have been
specified to be Scheduled Castes, in relation to the concerned
State} under Article 341 of the Constitution of India; and |
*[(k) “State” means the State of Punjab or the State of Haryana or the . |
State of Himachal Pradesh in relation to the transferred territory
within the meaning of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, or the |
Union Territory of Chandigarh, as the case may be,]. ; |
3. Registration of voters.—(1) Any Sikh more than twenty-one years }
of age, who wishes to have his name registered as a voter in any constituency
in which he is resident, may register his name with the Patwari of the Revenue |
estate in which he is resident or, ifhe is a resident in a town, with such person
as the Deputy Commissioner of the district in which such town is situated may
appoint for the purpose by notice posted at his office and at the office of the
Local Authority of such town, or with the Secretary of Local Authority; if the
Deputy Commissioner does not post any notice in respect of the appointment
of any such person, provided that if he is a resident in more than one
constituency, he shall not register his name as a voter in more than one |
constituency, and his name shall, subject to the provisions of these rules, remain
registered as a voter in the constituency in which he elects first to have it
registered and shall not be registered in any other constituency so long as he
remains a resident in the constituency in which: he elects first to have his
name registered:
Provided that no person shall be registerd, who does not make a declaration
as set out in Form I for I-A, as may be appropriate] appended to these rules
either, ifhe be literate, by signing the form after striking out inapplicable matter
or, if he be illiterate, by repeating the declaration, as read out from the form ’
~ after striking out matter inapplicable to the case, and thereafter thumb marking
the form.
(2) Ifa Patwari or any person appointed by the Deputy Commissioner ‘
, ‘Substituted for the words “State of Punjab” —vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification
No. G.S.R. 382(E), dated 26th July, 1978.
Inserted —vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. G.S.R. 382(E), dated 26th July,
3Inserted,-vide Ministry of Home A ffairs, Notification No. GS.R. 302(E), dated 30th March,
1995, and corrigendum No. GS.R. 546(E), dated 13th July, 1995.

[PAGE 3]
:

|

|

|

| 3
for the registeration of the names under the provisions of sub-rule(1), or the
Secretary of the Local Authority, as the case may be, refuses or neglects to

enter the name of any person who applies to have his name registered such
person may at any time during the preparation of the electoral rolis apply to

. the Deputy Commissioner to have his name registered and if such person is
entitled to have his name registered, the Deputy Commissioner shall direct the
registration of his name.

' '[4. Returning Officers._(1) For every constituency, the Commissioner,
Gurdwara Elections of the State in which the constituency is situated, shall by
notification in the official Gazette, appoint a returning officer who shall be an
officer of the Government, not below the rank of an Assistant Commissioner
or Extra Assistant Commissioner: ;

Provided that nothing in this rule shall prevent the Commissioner, Gurdwara
Elections from appointing the same person to be the returning officer of more
than one constituency.

(2) It shail be the general duty of the returning officer at any election to
do all acts and things as may be necessary for effectually conducting the
election in the manner provided by the Act and the rules or orders made
thereunder.

(3) The returning officer may delegate any of his functions to any
officer of the rank of Assistant Commissioner or Extra Assistant Commissioner,
if he is unavoidably prevented from performing the same.]

2(4A. General duties of the Deputy Commissioner.-The Deputy
Commissioner shall coordinate and supervise all work in connection with the
conduct of the election in all the constituencies or parts thereof falling within

: the district.

3[5. Ferm of Roll.-The roll for each constituency shall be in such

. form and in such language as the Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections,

; may specify.]
'Substituted—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 379(E), dated 23rd
August, 1996.
*Inserted.—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 379(E). dated 23rd
August, 1996
Inserted —vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July,
1978.

[PAGE 4]
4 |
6. Preparation and publication of preliminary rolls—(i) The
Deputy Commissioner shall commence the preparation of the roll on such
date as the '{Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections], may direct. and as
soon as may be, after the roi] is prepared shall publish it together with a notice |
giving the names and designations, or, in the case of officials. the designations
only, and the addresses, of the revising authorities to whom claims or objections ,
relating to the roll may be presented and the date, not less than twenty-one
days from the date of publication of the roll, by which such claims or objections
must be presented. ‘
(2) The reli and the notice prescribed in sub-rule (1) shall be published
by being posted up at the office of the returning officer and at the office of the
Deputy Commissioner of each district in which a part of the constituency is
situated; and such portion of the roll as the returning officer may deem fit together
with the notice shall be posted up at the office of each tehsil in which the area
comprising the constituency or part thereof is situated, at the office of every
Patwari ?[***] and at every Notified Sikh Gurdwara situated in such area:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to post the notice or the roll at the
office of any patwari in whose circle no voter has been registered as a resident §
4[Provided further that the roll published at the office of the Deputy
Commissioner shall not be rendered invalid on the ground merely that it does
not contain the roll in relation to any part or parts of a constituency which
have become inaccessible due to climate condition or otherwise.]
7. Appointment and jurisdiction of revising authority—The
Deputy Commissioner may appoint any person whom he deems fit to act asa
revising authority and may specify the revenue estate, municipal area, notified
area, cantonment area, zail, patwar circle, tehsil, sub-division or district from .
residents of which such revising authority may receive claims or objections
withregardtoaroll, ;
‘Substituted for the words “State Government” vide Ministry of Home Affair’s Notification, ,
GS.R.382(E), dated 26th July, 1978. .
7Omitted the words “at every post office” —vide Ministry of Home Affair’s Notification.
476(B), dated 28th September, 1978
>The words “nor at any post office in the area served by which no voier has been registered
as aresident’.-vide Notification ibid
+nserted.-vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification ibid.

[PAGE 5]
8. Presentation of claims and objections with regard to roll.—
(1) When a roll has been published under the provisions of rule 6, claims and
objections relating to the inclusion of names in, or their exclusion from, the roll
may be presented to the appropriate revising authority named in the notice

. : published with the roll by the date specified in such notice, provided that-
(a) aclaim or objection shall not relate to more than one person, shall
be in writing, shall be verified by the claimant or the objector and
, shall be presented to the appropriate revising authority personally
by the claimant or objector or by an agent duly authorised in writing
or be sent by post to the revising authority, so as to reach him
within the specified period; and

(b) aclaim or objcction not lodged within the specified period shall be

rejected.

(2) When objection is made to the inclusion in the electoral roll ofany
person whose name appears therein or to any particular in any entry in the
roll, such objection shall contain in respect of such person or entry, as the case

may be, all the particulars entered in the roll and shall be lodged in triplicate.

(3) Noperson shall prefer an objcction to the inclusion of any name in
the electoral rol! for a constituency unless his name is already included in the
electoral roll of that constituency.

(4) No application for the transfer of a name from the electoral roll of
one constituency to that of another constituency shall be entertained. If any
person desires such a transfer, he shall prefer an objection to the inclusion af
his name in the former roll, and a separate claim for the registration of his

, name in the fatter roll.

(5) The revising authority shal] maintain registers of claims and

objections in Forms IJ and II in which he shall cause to be entered at the time
‘ of its receipt particulars of every claim or objection received.

9. Posting of list of claims and objections.— (1) When a revising
authority receives an objection presented under the provisions of rule 8, hie
shall cause onc copy of it to be served on the person to whom objection
pertains, provided that if an objection or claim is presented by a person from
whom he is not authorised to receive it under the provisions of rule 7, he
shall return it to the person presenting it for presentation to the appropriate

[PAGE 6]
: 6
revising authority.
(2) Subject to such instructions as may from time to time be issued in
this behalf by the '[Chicf Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections,] the revising
authority shall post at his office a list of all claims and objections received in
time together with a notice showing the dates on which and the places at ‘
which such claims and objections will be heard; provided that in no case shall
a date be fixed less than seven days cr more than twenty-eight days from the ;
date on which such list is posted.
10. Disposal of claims and objections— (1) Gn the date and at the
place fixed under the provisions of rule 9, the revisiny authority shall call up
the cases in the order in which they are cutered in the list, shall dismiss any
case in which the claimant or objector is not present or is not represented, and
shall pass such order in any other case as he may dcein fit after hearing the |
parties concerned or their authorised agents and such evidence as may be |
produced and may appear to him to be necessary.
(2) The orders of'a revising authority passed under the provisions of |
sab-rule (1) shall be final. |
(3) A revising authority, as soon as he has disposed of all clainis and |
objections presented to him, and, in any case, not iater than thirty days from |
the date by which under the provisions of sub-rule (1) of rule 6 claims and |
objections must be presented, shall communicate each one of his decisions to |
the Deputy Commissioner who shall cause the electoral roll to be amended ia |
accordance therewith. |
(4) The revising authority shail also intimate to the Deputy )
Commissioner to correct any clerical or printing errors which the revising . |
authority may himself discover in the roll. The Deputy Commissioner may |
also, at any time before the publication of the final rol under mule 11, himself
correct any clerical or printing errors which he may discover in the electoral ’
11. Final publication of electoral roll.— (1) The Deputy |
Commissioner shal] then cause the roll, so amended either to be reprinted and }
republished or if he deems fit, shall republish the preliminary roll published |
‘Substituted for the words “Commissioner Gurdwara Election”,—vide Ministry of Home
Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July, 1978.

[PAGE 7]
under the provisions of sub-rule (1) of rule 6 together with a list of additions
and corrections, in the manner provided for the publication of roll and notices
in sub-rule (2) of rule 6.
(2) Arollrepublished under the provisions of sub-rule (1) with or without
* a list of corrections, as the case may be, shall come into force from the date of
such republication and shall continue in force for a period of five years when
a fresh roll shall be prepared in accordance with these rules, provided that
‘ the '{Central Government] may, by notification, direct the preparation in
accordence with these rules of a fresh roll at any time before the expiry of the
said period.
(3) Ifa constituency is called upon to elect a member or members
after an electoral roll has ceased to have force and ?[before] the completion
of the new electoral roll, the old electoral roll shall, for the purposes of that |
election, continue to operate as the electoral roll for the constituency. ;
(4) (a) Any person whose name is not included in the electoral roliofa
: constituency may apply in the manner hereinafter provided for the inclusion of
his name in that electoral roll.
(b) Where an application under clause (a) is made at any time after
the issue ofa notice calling upon the constituency to elect a member ormember:
and before the completion of that election it shall be made to the Deputy
, Commissioner of the district in which the constituency is situated, or if the
constituency extends over more than one district, to the Deputy Commissionei
within whose jurisdiction the applicant resides, and in other cases it shall be
made to the returning officer of the constituency.
(c) The Deputy Commissioner or the returning officer, as the casc:
. may be shall, if satisfied after such notice and such enquiry as be thinks fi
that the applicant is entitled to be registered in the electoral roll, direct his
. name to be included therein: ;
provided that if the applicant is registered in the eiectoral roll of any
other constituency, the Deputy Commissioner or the returning officer,as the |
\substituted for the words “Punjab Government”,—vide Ministry of. Home Affairs, Notification
No. GS.R. 382(£), dated 26th July, 1978.
2gupstituted for the words “therefore”,-vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. |
GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July, 1978.

[PAGE 8]
case may be, shall inform the returning officer of that constituency, and that
officer shall, on receipt of the information, strike off the applicant’s name
from that electoral roll.
({d) Where an application made under this rule is rejected, an appeal .
shall lic to the '[concerned Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections] within fifteen
days from the date of such rejection.
(c¢) No application or appeal under this sub-rule shall be entertained :
unless it is accompanied by a fee of-
@ one rupee in the case of application to the returning officer;
: Gi) five rupees in the case of an application to the Deputy
Conunissioner; and
(ai) five rupees in the case of an appeal to the [concerned
. Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections].
(The fee prescribed under clause (e) shall in no case be refunded.
(5) When a direction is issued under sub-rule (4), the electoral roll to
which such direction relates, shall be deemed to have been revised accordingly.

12. Correction of clerical errors in rolis.-Any person whose name
is on the roll ofa constituency may apply in writing to the returning officer or
to the appropciate revising authority for the correction of any error in the entry
in the roll relating to his name which isa clerical error or a mistake in the entry
of any particular which does not affect his right to bc eutered in the roll, and
the returning officer or revising authority, as the case may be, may at any time
make or cause to bemade such correction in the roll as he may deem necessary
in respect of such entry. ’

13. Dates for various stages of election.— (1) The '[Chief
Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections], shall by notification in the Official Gazette .
*[of the State or States concerned] fix the date or dates on, by or within
which--

(@) the nonination papers shall be presented;
ee .
‘Substituted, for the words “Commissioner Gurdwara Elections”,—vide Ministry of Home
Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 382{E), dated 26th July, 1978. .
2Added,-vide Ministry of Home Aftairs Notification No. GS.R. 379({E), dated 23rd August,

1996.

[PAGE 9]
(ii) the list of nomination papers shall be posted:

(ii) the nomination papers shail be scrutinised:

(iv) applications for the revision of the orders of the authority scrutinising

the nomination papers may be made to the Deputy Commission;
° (v) the revision applications shall be decided:

(vi) acandidate may withdraw his candidature;

(vii) the list of valid nomination papers shall be posted:

(viii) the list of polling stations shall be posted;

(ix) the polling shall be held; and

(x) _ the result of election shall be declared:

Provided that the last date for the nomination of candidates for election
shall be fixed not less than '[twenty days] before the date fixed for the poll
and not less than [seven days] after the date of the publication of the notice
and the date for the scrutiny of nominations shall be fixed not more than

i 2{seven days] from the last date for the nomination of candidates.

(2) The returning officer shall publish a copy of the notification fixing
the dates under sub-rule (1) at his office and the places at which the electoral
rol] is required to be published.

(3) The*[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections] may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, order a change in any of the dates fixed under sub-rule
(1) at any time:

Provided that unless the *[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections|

5 otherwise directs, no such order shall be deemed to invalidate any proceedings
taken before the date of the order.

14. Notification ef symbols.— (1) The 4[Chief Commisstoner,

‘ at
‘Substituted for the words “thirty days”,vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No.
GS.R. 278(E), dated 41h April. 2002. °
Substituted for the words “fifteen days”. —vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No.
GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July. 1978.
Substituted, for the words “State Government” —vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification
No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July, 1978.
+Substituted, for the words “State Govemment”,-vide Notification ibid.

[PAGE 10]
Gurdwara Elections] shail by notification im the Official Gazette, publish a list
of symbols and may in like manner add to or vary such list.
(2) Ineach constituency every nomination paper delivered under rule
15 shall also be accompanied by a declaration in writing specifying the particular
symbol] which the candidate has chosen for his first preference out of the list .
of symbols published under sub-rule (1) and also specifying two other symbols
out of that list which he has chosen for his second and third preferences,
respectively: ‘
Provided that the choice to be made by a candidate under this sub-rule |
shall be subject to such restrictions as the '[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara |
Elections] may think fit to impose in that behalf. }
15. Nomination of candidates. (1) Any person not ineligible for |
membership of the Board under the provisions of section 45 of the Act may be |
nominated as a candidate for election: }
previded that—
(a) onor before the date fixed for the nomination of candidates under
the provisions of rule 13, between the hours of 11 O'clock in the i
forenoon and 3 O’clock in the afternoon, he shall deliver, either in
person or by his proposer or by an agent appointed by authority in
writing, signed by the candidate and verified by a magistrate, subregistrar, sarpanch, nayaye pradhan, lambardar or member of
legislature or loca! body to the returning officer or any other officer
appointed by him in this behalf, a nomination paper completed in
Form IV and subscribed by the candidate himself as assenting to
the nomination and by one person as proposer, whose name is
included in the roll of the constituency concerned published under
the provisions of rule 11: .
(b) ne person shall subscribe as proposer a number of nomination papers
greater than the number of members to be elected to represent the .
constituency in question, and if a person has subscribed a larger
number of nomination papers than there are vacancies to be filled,
only those of the papers so subscribed which have been first received
up to the number of such vacancies shall be deemed to be valid.
“Substituted, for the words “State Government” —vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification
No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July. 1978.

[PAGE 11]
ik

(2) Inaconstituency where there is a [reserved seat for the members
of Scheduled Castes] no candidate shall be deemed to be qualified to be chosen
to fill that seat unless he furnishes to the returning officer, either at the time of
the presentation of the nomination paper or at the time of scrutiny thereof, a

. declaration verified by the candidate on oath or solemn affirmation before a
magistrate, that the candidate is a member of the Scheduled Castes for which
the seat has been so reserved and the declaration specifies the particular

‘ caste to which the candidate belongs.

(3) On the presentation of a nomination paper, the returning officer
shall satisfy himself that the names and electoral roll numbers of the candidate
and his proposer as entered in the nomination paper are the same as those
entered in the electoral rolls:

Provided that the returning officer may—

(a) permit any clerical error in the nomination paper in regard to the

said names or numbers to be corrected in order to bring them in
conformity with the corresponding entries in the electoral rolls, and

(b) where necessary, direct that any clerical or printing error m the

said entries shail be overlooked.

16. Deposits.— (1) On or before the date appointed for the nomination )
of candidates, each candidate shall deposit or cause to be deposited with the |
returning officer or in the treasury or a sub-treasury or Reserve Bank a sum
of 2{one thousand rupees] and no candidate shall be deemed to be duly
nominated unless such deposit has been made:

Provided that not more than one such deposit need be made by any
candidate in respect of his candidature for any one constituency:

; Provided further that where the candidate is a member of the Scheduled
Castes, the amount to be deposited by him or on his behalf shall be *[five

. hundred rupees].

(2) Ifa candidate by whom or on whose behalf the deposit has been

: UOC
‘Substituted for the words “reserved seat” —vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No
GS.R. 278(E), dated 4th April, 2002.
: 2Substituted for the words “one hundred rupees”. —vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification
| No. GS.R. 278(E), dated 4th April. 2002.
5Substituted, for the words “rupees fifty”-vide Notification ibid.

[PAGE 12]
made withdraws his candidature in the manner and within the time specified
inrule 20, except sub-rule (2) thereof, or if the nomination of any such candidate
is rejected, the whole deposit shall be returned to the person by whom it was
made.

(3) Ifacandidate by whom er on whose behalf the deposit has been
made withdraws his candidature within the time specified in sub-rule (2) of ,
tule 20, three-quarters of the deposit shal] be returned to the person by whom
it was made and the remaining one-quarter shall be forfeited to the State
Government. ,

‘{Explanation.—In this sub-rule and in sub-rules (5) and (6), the
expression “State Government” means the Government of the State in which
the candidate concerned is registered as a voter.]

(4) it a candidate by whom or on whose behalf the deposit has been
made dies before the commencement of the poll the deposit, if made by him
shall be returned in full to his legal representative or, if not made by the
candidate, shall be returned in full to the person by whom it was made.

(5) 1facandidate by whom or vii whose behalf the deposit referred to
in sub-rule (1), bas been made is not elected and the number of votes polled
by him does not exceed *[one-sixth of the total number of valid votes polled]
or, in the case of a constituency returning more than one member, [one-sixth
of the total number of vuies polled] divided by the total number of members to
be elected in the constituency concerned, the deposit shall be forfeited to the
State Government.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this sub-rule the number of votes polled |
shall be deemed to be the number of baliot-papers other than rejected ballot- |
papers, counted. .

(6) Ifacandidate by whom or on whose behalf the deposit, referred to
in sub-rule (1), has been made is elected or is not elected, the deposit shall if
it is not forfeited under sub-rule (5), be returned to the candidate or to the .
person who has made this deposit on his behalf, as the case may be, after the
a
‘Added,—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 382(B), dated 26th July.

1978.
*Substituted for the words “one-eighth of the total number of votes polled”. —vide Ministry of
Hoine Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 278(E), dated 4th April. 2002

[PAGE 13]
publication of the result of the election in the Official Gazette:

Provided that if a candidate is duly nominated at a general election 1B
more constituencies than one, not more than one of the deposits made by him
or on his behalf shall be retumed and the remainder shall be forfeited to the

, State Government.

17. List of nominations to be posted.—The returning officer shall.

‘ on the date specified under rule 13 in this behalf, post at his office a list ofall
the candidates, whose nomination papers have been duly presented in
accordance with the provisions ofrule 15, togetherwith descriptions similar to
those contained in the nomination papers of the candidates and of the perons
who have subscribed the nomination papers as proposers.

18. Candidates, etc., to be allowed to examine nomination papers.—
On the date fixed for the scrutiny of nominations under the provisions ofrule
13 the candidates, one proposer of each candidate and one agent of such
candidate but no other person, may attend at such time and place as the
returning officer may appoint, and the returning officer shal! give them all
| reasonable facilities for examining the nomination papers of all candiates
whose names are included in the list of candidates posted under the provisions
ofrule 17.

19. Scrutiny of nominations and decision of objections.-(1) On the
date fixed for the scrutiny of nominations under the provisions of rule 13, after
facilities have been given for the examination of nomination papers under the
provisions of rule 18, and ifnecessary on the next following day, the returning
officer or any other officer not below the rank of Extra Assistant Commissioner
appointed by the returning officer in this behalf shall examine the nomination

° papers of all candidates whose names are included in the list of candidates

posted under the provisions of tule 17, and shall decide all objections made to

. any nomination, and may. either on such objection or of his own motion, after

such summary enquiry, if any, as he may deem necessary, reject any nomination
onany of the following grounds—
(a) that the candidate is ineligibie for election under the provisions of
Section 45 of ihe Act:
(b) that a proposer was not qualified to subscribe the nomination paper
under the provisions of rule 15:

[PAGE 14]
(c) that there has been any failure to comply with any of the provisions
ofrule 15 or rule 16;
(d) that the candidate or his proposer is not identical with the person
whose number on the roll is given m the nomination paper as the
number of such candidate or proposer, as the case may be; ,
(e) | that the signature of the candidate or his proposer is not genuine or
has been obtained by force or fraud:
Provided that -
(i) sncthing contained in clause (a) of this sub-rule shail be deemed to
authorise the rejection of the nomination of any candidate on the
ground that he is ineligible for election owing to his being a patit;
Gi) nothing contained in clauses (b), (c), (d) or (e) of this sub-rule shall
be deemed to authorise the rejection of the nomination of any
candidate on the ground of any irregularity in respect of a nomination
paper if the candidate has been duly nominated by means ofanother
nomination paper in respect of which no irregularility has been
committed. |
|
(2) ifany question arises whether a candidate is or is noi able to read
and write Gurmukhi, the candidate shall be deemed to ful fil that qualification if |
he produces a cartificate from the headmaster of a Gevernment or a recognised |
Khatsa School, or not below the middie standard. to the effect that the candidate
can recite Shri Guru Granth Sahib in Gurmukhi and can also write Gurmukhi.
(3) The Returning Officer or other officer appointed under the provisions
. . . . . ;
of sub-rule (!) for the scrutiny of nomination papers shali endorse on each
nomination paper his decision accepting or rejecting it. and if he rejects it, shall |
record in writing a brief statement of his reasons for so rejecting it. : |
(4) Any person aggrieved by any order passed by an authority under |
sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (3), may, within the date specified under rule 13 in this . :
behalf, present in person or by counsel or by an agent appointed by authority
in writing signed by him and verified by a Magistrate, Sub Registrar, Sarpanch,
Nayaye Pradhan, Lambardar or a Member of Legislature or local authority, to
the Deputy Commissioner of the district in which the Returning Officer is
posted, an application for revision of such order.
(5) When any application for revision of an order has been received

[PAGE 15]
under sub-rule (4), the Deputy Commissioner. may. after hearing the applicant
or his counsel, confirm such order or, after serving the candidates for election
from the constituency with a notice, either personally or by registered post or
by affixing its copy to those persons’ residence or at the addresses given in
’ their nomination papers, intimating the date on which the application will be
heard, and after hearing the applicant and such other candidates, as may
appear on the date so intimated, may confirm such order or set it aside and
é pass such other order as he may deem fit. The order so passed under this subrule shall be final.

20. Withdrawal of candidature. '[(1) Any candidate may withdraw
his candidature by notice in Form IV-A subscribed by him and delivered by
him in person or by his agent to the Returning Officer before three O'clock in
the afternoon on or before the date specified under rule 13 in this behalf and
the Returning Officer shall publish a notice in Form IV-B in respect of such
withdrawal and no person who has thus withdrawn his candidature shall be
allowed to cancel his withdrawal or fo be re-nominated as a candidate for the
same election. ]

(2) The Returning Officer may allow withdrawal of candidature not |
less than ten days previous to the date of the commencement of the poll if-

(a) ina constituency where there is no reserved seat, the number of
remaining candidates 1s one;

(b) in a constituency where there is a reserved seat, the number cf
remaining candidates is one each for the non-reserved and reserved
seat: :

. Provided that withdrawal may also be allowed for the non-reserved or
reserved seat alone for which the number of remaining candidate is one.

21. Assignment oi symbeis to candidates.—(1) [fin any constituency,

, the number of validly nominated candidates exceeds the number of seais to
be filled, the Retuming Officer shall, before preparing a list of valid nominations
under rule 22, consider the choice as respects symbols expressed by candidates
in the declarations referred to in sub-rule (2) of rule 14, delivered by them
alongwith their nomination papers and shail subject to any general or special
‘Substituted.—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. G.S.R. 278(E£), dated 4th
April, 2002.

[PAGE 16]
directions issued by the '[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections] in this
behalf, assign a different symbol to each candidate in conformity, as far as
practicable, with his choice. If more candidates than one indicate their
preference for the same symbol. the Returning Officer shall decide by lot to
which of those candidates the symbol shall be assigned. The decision of the
Returning Officer in assigning any symbol to a candidate under this ruie shall
be final.
(2) In every case where a symbol has been assigned to a candidate .
under sub-rule (1), such candidate or his agent shall forthwith be informed of
the symbol so assigned and be supplied with a specimen thereof by the Returning
Officer.
22. List of valid nominations to be posted—(1) On completion of
the scrutiny of nominations and after the expiry of the period within which
candidatures may be withdrawn under the provisions of sub-rule (1) of rule
20, the Returning Officer shall forthwith prepare a list of valid nominations
and cause it to be posted up in some conspicuous piace in his office and at
such other places in the constituency as he may deem fit. |
(2) The list to be posted under sub-rule (1) shall contain the names in |
alphabetical order in Gurmukhi and addresses of the validly nominated |
candidates as given in the nomination papers and indicate the symbcl assigned |
to each candidate. In the case of an election in a constituency where the seats |
to be filled included a reserved seat, the list shall be divided into two paris, viz..
Part ‘A’ and ‘B’. Part ‘A’ shall contain the names of validly nominated
candidates for the non-reserved seat and Part ‘B’ the names of validly
nominated candidates for the reserved seat and in both cases the names shall
be arranged in alphabetical order separately. .
(3) If there are two candidates whose names are the same, they shall
be distinguished by the addition of their occupation or their village or in such
other manner as the returning officer may think fit. ‘
23. Death of a candidate before poll.— If a candidate dies before
the poll and after the date fixed for the nomination of candidates and his
nomination is or has been accepted as valid at the time of’ scrutiny of nomination
a
'Substituted—for the words “State Government”,-vide Ministry of Home Affairs,
Notification No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July, 1978.

[PAGE 17]
papers, ali proceedings with reference to the election of a member in the
constituency or constituencies in which he was candidate shall be commenced
a new in all respects as if for a fresh election :

Provided that no fresh nomination shall be necessary in the case of

. candidate whose name is entered on a list of valid nominations posted under
the provisions of rule 22.

; 24. Procedure in uncontested election.—-(1) The Returning Officer

. shall, subject to the provisions of rule 23, deem and declare the validly nominated
candidate (s) elected if-

(a) inaconstituency where there is no reserved seat, there is only one |
yalidly nominated candidate;

(b) ima constituency, where there is a reserved seat, there is only one
candidate for each of the non-reserved and reserved seat:

Provided that where there is only one validly nominated
candidate for the non-reserved or reserved seat, the candidate for
that seat alone shall be deemed and declared to be elected.

'{(2) The Returning Officer shall forward the names of the elected
candidate(s) to the Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections and,
except where a constituency extends over more than one State,
also to the oncerned Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections.]

(3) If there is no validly nominated candidate for the non-reserved
seat or reserved seat or both, the {Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara
Elections] shall fix another date for election to the respective
category of seats.

* 25. Procedure in contested election.—If the number of candidates
validly nominated in any constituency is more than one, a poll shall be taken on
the date or dates specified under rule 13 in this behalf for the election:

1s

provided that in a constituency having a reserved seat poll shall be taken

for the non-reserved seat or reserved seat, as the case may be, for which the
nnn Sn Pann
'Substituted,—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. G.S.R. 382(E), dated 26th
July. 1978.

?Substituted, for the words “State Government”,~vide Ministry of Home Affairs
Notification, ibid.

[PAGE 18]
number of validly nominated candidates exceeds one.

'{25-A. Appointment of election agents.—(}) A contesting candidate
may appoint in Form IV-C any person to be his election agent and notice of
such appointment shall be given by forwarding the same in duplicate to the
Retuming Officer who shall return one copy thereof to the election agent
after affixing thereon his seal and signature in token of his approval of the ,
appointment.

(2) The revocation of the appointment of the election agent under sub- .
rule (1) shall be made in Form IV-D and shall be lodged with the Presiding |
Officer and the Returning Officer and in the case of any such revocation the
candidate may make fresh appointment in his place. |

25-B. Appointment of polling agent— (1) A contesting candidate |
may appoint in Form IV-E any person to be his polling agent and the
same shall be handed over to the polling agent for production at the polling |
station. |

(2) No polling agent shall be admitted in the poiling station uniess he |
has delivered to the Presiding officer the instrument of his appointment made ,
under sub-rule (1) after duly signing before the Presiding Officer the declaration 1
contained therein. }

(3) The revocation of the appoimtment of a polling agent made under )
sub-rule (1) shail be made in Form [V-F and shall be lodged with the Presiding :
Officer and in the event of any such revocation the candidate may make fresh
appointment in his place.] |

26. List of polling stations to be pubiished and palling officers
to be appointed.—(1) The returning officer shall select such number of polling
stations as he may deem necessary and shall, not less than seven days befare :
the first date of the dates fixed for the election, publish in the manner prescribed
for the publication of rolls and notices in sub-rule (2) of rule 6 a list showing ‘
the polling stations so selected, the polling area for which each such station
has been selected and the hours during which each such station shall remain
open for the recording of votes, and no person shall be permitted to record his
vote except at the polling station of the area to which according to the roll he
‘inserted —v:de Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No. GS.R. 278(E) dated 4th April,

2002.

[PAGE 19]
belongs and during the hours specified in the list.

(2) The returning officer shall appoint a presiding officer for each polling
station and such other persons (heveinafter referred to as polling officers) to
assist the presiding officer as he may deem necessary but he shall not appoint

. any person who has been employed by or on behalf of, or has been otherwise
working for, a candidate in or about the election. If the presiding officer, owing
toillness or other unavoidable cause, absents himself from the polling station,

t his functions shal] be performed by such polling officer as has been previously
authorised by the returning officer to perform such functions during any such
absence, and if a polling officer is absent from the polling station, the presiding
officer may, subject to the restriction imposed above, appoint any person who
is present at the polling station to be the polling officer and inform the returning
officer accordingly.

The returning officer may at any time, ifhe thinks fit, appoint any other |
person to act in a place of any person previously appointed.

(3) The presiding officer shall, in addition to performing any other duties

) imposed upon by these rules, be in general charge of all arrangements at the
polling station and may issue orders as to the manner in which persons shall
be admitted to the polling station and generally for the preservation of peace
and order at or in the vicinity of the polling station.

27. Materials to be supplied at polling stations.(1) The '[Chief
Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections], may direct that before any ballot paper
is delivered to a voter at a polling station, it shall be marked with such official
mark as may be specified by him in this behalf, and the official mark so
specified shall be kept secret.

. (2) The returning officer shall provide at each polling station as many
ballot boxes and ballot papers as may be necessary, instruments for stamping
the official mark on the ballot papers when any direction in this behalf has

‘ been issued by the '[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections}, copies of the
roll or such part thereof as contain the names of the electors entitled to vote at
such station and materials sufficient for the purpose of enabling electors to
mark the ballot papers.

‘Substituted for the words “Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections”,—vide Ministry of Heme
Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July, 1978.

[PAGE 20]
28. Arrangement for secrecy of voting.—Each polling station shall
be furnished with such number of poljing compartments, in which electors can
record their votes screened from observation, as the presiding officer thinks
necessary.

29. Ballot box.-(1) Every ballot box shali be of such design as may
be approved by the [Chief Conmmissioner, Gurdwara Elections], and it shall
be so constructed that ballot papers can be inserted therein to during the
polling but cannot be withdrawn therefrom without the box being unlocked .
and the seals being broken.

(2) One baljot box shail, at a time, be used in a polling station and the
same shall be placed for the receipt of the ballot papers in the view of the
presiding officer, candidates and their agents.

30. Notice to be exhibited.—Outside each polling station and each
pojling compartment there shail be displayed prominentldy:—

(i) arotice specifying the poiling area the electors of which are entitled

to vote at the polling station;

Gi) a list of the validly nominated candidates; and t

(ii) instructions for marking the votes on the ballot papers.

31. procedure before commencement of poll—(1) The presiding
officer shall, immediately before the commencement of the poll, allow inspection
of each ballot box to be used at the poll to the candidates, their election agents
and their polling agents who may be present at the polling station and
demonstrate to them that it is empty.

(2) Where it is necessary to use a paper seal for securing the ballot
box, the presiding officer shall thereafter fix, im the space meant therefor in
each such box, a paper seal provided for the purpose.

(3) He shall also affix on such paper seal his own signature and ‘=
signatures or seals of the candidates or of their election or polling agents as
may be present and who desire to affix such signatures or seals and shall then
secure and seal each box in their presence in such a manner that the slit in the
Substituted for the words “Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections”,—vide Ministry of Home
Affairs, Notification No. G.S.R. 382(E), dated 26th July, 1978 .

[PAGE 21]
|
box for the insertion of the ballot papers remains open.

(4) Where it is not necessary to use a paper seal for securing a ballot
box, the presiding officer shall, after demonstration under sub-rule (1) that the
ballot box is empty, secure and seal the box in such a manner that the slit in the

. box for insertion of ballot papers therein remains open and shall also allow the
candidates or their election or polling agents, who may be present, to affix
their own seals on the box, if they so desire.

. (5) The paper seal or other seals used in a ballot box shall be affixed in ; :
such a manner that it shall not be possible to open the box without breaking
such paper seal or other seals or any thread on which such seals have been
affixed.

32. Admission to polling station._The presiding officer shall regulate
the number of electors to be admitted at any one time inside the place fixed
for the poll and shalt exclude therefrom all other persons except:— ;

(a) the polling officers;

(b) every candidate, his election agent and one polling agent for each

candidate;

(c) persons authorised by the '[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara

Elections], Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections and the returning
officer;

(d) public servants on duty {in connection with elections];

(e) achild in arm accompanying an elector;

(f) aperson accompanying a blind or infirm elector who cannot move ;

* without help; and

(g) such other persons as the presiding officer may from time to time

‘ admit for the purpose of assisting him in taking the poll.

2[33. Form of ballot papers.(1) Every ballot paper shall have a
NN
\Substituted-—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 302(E), dated 30th
March, 1995. ;

: 2Substituted—-vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 278(E), dated 4th
April, 2002.

[PAGE 22]
22 |
counterfoil attached thereto and the ballot paper and counterfoil shali be in
such form and the particulars therein shall be in such language or languages |
as the Chief Commissioner Gurdwara Elections may direct. |
(2) Thenames of the candidates shall be arranged on the ballet paper |
in the same order in which they appear in the list of validly nominated candidates |
prepared under rule 22. sf
(3) If two or more candidates bear the same name, they shall be |
distinguished by the addition of their occupation or residence or in any .
other manner as may be directed by the Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara |
Elections.! .
34. Voting to be in person and not by prexy.—The voting shall be i
by ballot and every elector wishing to record his vote shall do so in person and |
not by proxy. |
35. Questions to be put to electors.-At any time before a ballot
paper is delivered to an elector, the Presiding Officer ora Polling Officer may ~ |
of his own accord, if he has reason to doubt the identity of the elector or his |
right to vote at the Polling Station and shall, ifso required by a candidate or his )
agent, put to the elector the following questions:- }
(a) Are you the person enrolled as follows:- (Reading the whole entry |
relating to the elector from the roll)? )
(b) Have you already voted at the present election? |
(c) Such other question as he may deem fit or necessary; and the
elector shall not be supplied with a bailot paper unless he answers
the first question in the affirmative and the second question in the
negative or if he refuses to answer any other question put to him in |
pursuance of this rule. ‘
36. Special procedure for preventing personation of electors.—
(1) Subject to the other provisions of this rule, every elector who applies for a ,
ballot paper or ballot papers for the purpose of voting at a polling station shall,
before receiving such ballot paper or papers, allow:- |
(a) the inspection of his left forefinger to the Presiding Officer or any
Polling Officer; and
(b) an indelible ink mark to be put on his left forefinger. |
|

[PAGE 23]
(2) if any such elector ~

(a) refuses to allow such inspection of his left forefinger, or

(b) persists in doing any act with a view to remove such mark after it

has been put, he shall not be entitled to be supplied with any ballot
’ paper or to record his vote at the election.
(3) No person who already has a mark on his left forefinger at the
time he enters the polling station shall be supplied any ballot paper, and ifany
such person applies for a ballot paper or ballot papers, he shall be liable to be
arrested and prosecuted for personation.

(4) Any reference in this rule or in rule 37 of the left forefinger of an
elector shall, in the case where the elector has his left forefinger missing, be
construed as a reference to any other finger of his left hand, and shall, in the
case where all the fingers of his left hand are missing, be construed as a
reference to the forefinger or any other finger of his right hand, and shall, in
the case where all his fingers of both the hands are missing, be construed as a

' reference to such extremity of his left or right arm as he possesses.

37. Procedure before recording of votes.-(1) The elector on
entering the polling station shall first allow his left forefinger to be inspected
by a Polling Officer for the purpose of ascertaining if he already has any mark
of indelible ink on that finger. If there is no such mark, the Polling Officer incharge of the electoral roll shall ascertain the elector’s name and address and
such other particulars as appear on the roll and, after having checked these by
reference to the roll, shall call out the number, name and description of the
elector according to the entry in the roll.

'{(2) On the elector’s name being called out, the elector shall approach
. the Polling Officer-in-charge of the ballot papers who shall then cause the left
forefinger of the elector to be marked with indelible ink and shall thereafter

\ deliver a ballot paper or the requisite number of ballot papers to the elector:
co Provided that before delivering the ballot paper or papers the Polling
Officer-in-charge, where a direction has been issued in this behalf under subtule (1) of rule 27, stamp the ballot paper or papers, as the case may be, with
Snare
‘Substituted, for sub-rule (2)—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 278(E),

dated 4th April, 2002.

[PAGE 24]
|
such official mark as may have been specified under that rule.
(3) At the time of issuing a ballot paper or papers to an elector the |
Polling Officer-in-charge shall- '
(a) record on its counterfoil the electoral roll number of the elector as
entered in the marked copy of the electoral roll; .
(b) obtain the signature or thumb impression of the elector on the said
counterfoil; and
(c) mark the name of the elector in the marked copy of the electoral
roll to indicate that.a ballot paper has been issued to him, without
further recording therein the serial number of the ballot paper issued
to that elector:
Provided that no ballot paper shall be delivered to an elector unless
he has put his signature or thumb impression on the countertoil of the ballot
paper.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (3) it would not be
necessary for the Presiding Officer or the Polling Officer or any other officer
to attest the signature or the thumb impression, as the case may be, of the '
elector on the counterfoil.
(5) No person in the Polling Station shall note down the serial number
of the ballot paper or papers issued to particular electors. ]
11(6)] In deciding the right of a person to obtain a paper under this rule,
the Presiding Officer at any polling station may interpret an entry in the electoral
roll so as to overlook merely clerical or printing error if he is satisfied that such
person is identical with the elector to whom such entry relates.
38. Identification of electors.The Presiding Officer may employ
at the polling station such persons as he thinks fit to assist him or any Polling
Officer in identifying the electors. ;
39. Manner of recording votes.~(1) The elector on receivinga ballot ~
paper shall forthwith proceed to one of the polling compartments and there
make a mark on the ballot paper against the name of the candidate for whom
a
'Sub-rule (3) re-numbered as sub-rule (6),—-vide Ministry of Home A ffaizs, Notification No.
GS.R. 278(E}, dated 4th April, 2002. ;

[PAGE 25]
he intends to vote in accordance with such instructions as the '{Chief
Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections], may issue in this behalf.

(2) In a constituency where there is a reserved seat, every elector
shall be issued two ballot papers — one (white) for the non-reserved seat and

, other (coloured) for the reserved seat and he shall mark each ballot paper in
the manner indicated in sub-rule (1).

‘ (3) The electer shall then, before quitting the polling compartment, fold
his ballot paper so as to conceal his vote, and after showing to the presiding
Officer the distinguishing mark, ifany, on the ballot paper, put the ballot paper
so folded into the ballot box in the presence of the Presiding Officer.

(4) The Presiding Officer shall, when he is so requested by an elector,
explain to him instructions for the recording of votes.

(5) Every elector shall vote without undue delay and shall quit the
polling station as soon as he has put his ballot paper in the ballot box. No ;
elector shall remain in a polling compartment longer than 1s reasonably
necessary for marking his vote.

(6) No elector shall be allowed to enter a polling compartment when
another elector is inside.

40. Recording of votes of infirm electors.—(1) [f owing to blindness
or other physical infirmity, an elector is unable to read the ballot paper or
make a mark thereon, the Presiding Officer shall record the vote on the ballot
paper in accordance with the wishes of the elector and fold it up so as to
conceal the vote.

. (2) The elector shall then himself or with the assistance of the Presiding
Officer insert the ballot paper into the ballot box. -

(3) While acting under this rule the Presiding officer shal] observe as

‘ much secrecy as is feasible and shall keep a brief record of each such instance
but shall not indicate therein the manner in which any vote has been given.

41. Tendered votes.(1) If a person representing himself to be a
particular elector named on the electoral roll applies for a ballot paper after
'Substituted,—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th
July, 1978. oe

[PAGE 26]
another person has already voted as such elector, he shall, after duly answering
such questions as the Presiding Officer may ask, be supplied with a ballot paper
in Form V (hereinafter in the rules referred to as a tendered ballot paper).
(2) Every such person shall, before being supplied with a tendered
ballot paper sign his name against the entry relating to him ina list in Form VI. .
(3) Such person shall thereafter record on the ballot paper the name or |
names of the candidate or candidates for whom he wishes to vote; but if
owing te illiteracy or any other reason he is unable to make such record, the °
Presiding Officer shall do so in accordance with his wishes. |
(4) The procedure laid down in sub-rule (3) shall be followed with due |
; regard to secrecy. |
(5) Every such tendered ballot paper shall forthwith be placed in a
separate cover which shall be sealed and all such covers containing tendered |
ballot papers shall be kept in a separate packet.
42. Challenged votes.—(1) If any candidate or his agent deciares i
and undertakes to prove that any person by applying for a ballot paper has 7
committed the offence of personation, the Presiding Officer may require such
person to state his name and address and shall then enter such name and
address in the list of challenged votes in Form VW and shall require such
person to sign such entry or, ifhe is unable to write, to affix his thumb-impression
thereto and the Presiding Officer shal! sign his name across such impression
and may further require such person to produce evidence of identification: |
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Presiding Officer under this |
sub-rule unless a sum of two rupees has been deposited im cash with the |
Presiding Officer by the candidate or his agent for each chalienge he makes. ,
(2) Ifthe person so challenged refuses to comply with such requisition, .
he shall not be permitted to vote. But if such person does so comply and on
being questioned in the manner provided in rule 35 answers the first question ,
in the affirmative and the second question in the negative and replies |
satisfactorily, to any other question put to him in pursuance of that rule, and if }
having been required to produce evidence of identification he produces evidence,
which the Presiding Officer considers satisfactory, he shall be allowed to vote ~ |
after he has been informed of the penalty for personation. |
|
|
:
|
|

[PAGE 27]
(3) If the Presiding Officer after such inquiry on the spot as he thinks
necessary is of opinion that the challenge made by the candidate or his agent
under sub-rule (1) is frivolous and has not been made in good faith, he shall
- direct the deposit made under sub-rule (1) to be forfeited to '{the Government
of the State in which the polling station is situate] and his order in this respect
, shall be final.
(4) if the deposit made under sub-rule (1) is not forfeited under sub-
‘ rule (3), it shall be returned forthwith to the person by whom it was made.
(5) The Presiding Officer shall in every case, whether or not the person
challenged is allowed to vote, make a note of the circumstances in the list of
challenged votes.
43. Spoilt ballot papers.—A voter who has inadvertantly dealt with
his ballot paper in such a manner that it cannot conveniently be used as a
ballot paper may, after delivering such ballot paper to the Presiding Officer
and satisfying him of such inadvertence, obtain another ballot paper in place
of the spoilt paper, and the latter shall be *[marked as spoilt: cancelled.
44, Recording of votes by staff on duty at polling station at which |
they are not entitled to vote.—(1) A Presiding Officer, a polling officer, any
other public servant or a polling agent, who is an elector in a constituency andis, by reason of his being on duty at a polling station, unable to vote at the
polling station where he is entitled to do so may, on application, be allowed to
record his vote in that constituency by means of the ballot paper(s) prescribed
for the constituency concemed, to be returned to the Returning Officer of
that constituency by post so as to reach him before the date fixed for the
declaration ofresult under rule 13.
* (2) Every such application shall be addressed to the Returning Officer
of the constituency, shall specify the name of the elector, his address and his
electoral rot] number and shall be made at least ten days before the date fixed
‘ for the poll.
(3) {f the Returning Officer is satisfied that the applicant is entitled to
te
‘Substituted for the word “Government”,—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No.
GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July, 1978.
2Substituted for the words “marked as cance!led”,—vide Ministry of Home Affairs,
Notification No. GS.R. 278(E), dated 4th April, 2002
|

[PAGE 28]
vote under sub-rule (1), he shall make arrangements for the supply to him of
the ballot paper(s) by adding the word “postal” thereon.
45. Return of Ballot Paper by elector.—If an elector after obtaining
any ballot paper for the purpose of recording his vote decides not to use the
samme, he sha!l return the ballot paper to the Presiding Officer, and the ballot ‘
paper so returned shall then be marked as “cancelled—returned” and kept in a
; separate envelope set apart for the purpose and a record shall be kept by the
. .. ..,Presiding Officer of all such ballot papers. a
tat. . 2.46. Closing of polling station.—The Presiding Officer shall close the
polling station each day at the hour appointed under the provisions of sub rule
(1) of rule 26 and no ballot paper shall be issucd to any elector after such hour,
but all electors present at the place fixed for the poll before it is so closed,
shall be entitled to have their votes recorded:
Provided that if for any reason it was not possible to open the polling
station at the hour appointed under the provisions of sub-rule (1) of rule 26, or
if by reason of disorder at the polling station, or for any other reason the
-. polling was stopped for a certain time, the Presiding Officer shall keep the
polling station open for a further period equal to the period that elapsed between
"the hour appointed for the opening of the polling station and the hour at which
it was actually opened or the time during which polling was stopped, as the ]
case may be.
47. Procedure at close of poll.—(1) The Presiding Officer of each
polling station shall, as soon as practicable after the close of the poll, in the
presence of the candidates or their agents who may be present, prepare an
account of ballot papers in Form VIII.
(2) He shalJl also make up into separate packets— , ‘
(i) _ the unused ballot papers;
(ii) the tendered ballot papers; ‘
oO (i) the cancelled ballot papers (returned as well as spoilt);
(iv) the marked copy of the electoral roll;
(v) _ the tendered votes list;
(vi) the list of challenged votes; |
|

[PAGE 29]
(vii) any other paper directed by the returning officer to be kept in a
sealed packet; and shall seal each such packet with his own seal
and the seals of such candidates or election or polling agents as
may desire to affix their seals thereon.
; (3) He shall forward the account of ballot papers referred to in subrule (1) and the packets referred to in sub-rule (2) to the returning officer,
alongwith the packets referred to inrule 51.
| . 48. Fresh poll in case of destruction of ballot boxes.—(1) '[If at
an election] any ballot box or boxes is or are unlawfully taken out of the
: custody of the Presiding Officer, or is/are in any way tampered with, or is or
are either accidently or intentionally destroyed or lost, the election to which
: such ballot-box or boxes relate shall be liable to be declared as void but only in
| respect of the polling at the polling station or stations provided for the poll, as
| the case may be, at which ballot-box or boxes was or were used and no
further.
(2) Whenever the polling at any polling station or stations or at the.
place fixed for the poll shall be liable to be declared as void. under sub-rule (1),
the Presiding Officer shall, as soon as practicable after the act or event causing
such voilence has come to his knowledge, report the matter to the returning
officer, Deputy Commissioner, '[concerned Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections
and the Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections.] The Deputy Commissioner
shall, in the event of his being satisfied, declare the election void and the
returning officer shall, with the approval of the [Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara
Elections], appoint a day for the taking of a fresh poll in such or every polling
station or in such place fixed for the poll and fix the hours during which the
poll will be taken:
. Provided that no fresh poll shall be taken if the difference between the
votes secured by the two candidates who have obtained the largest number of
t votes is more than the total number of voters entitled to vote at such a polling
station or polling stations in the constituency.
(3) The provisions of these rules shall apply to every such fresh poll as
they apply to the original poll. ;
'Substituted,—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th
July, 1978.

[PAGE 30]
49, Adjournment of poll in emergencies.—(1) If at an election the
proceedings at any polling station provided under rule 26 are interrupted or
obstructed by any riot or open violence, or ifat an election it is not possible to
take the poll at any polling station on account of any natural calamity, or any
other sufficient cause, the Presiding officer shall announce an adjournment of
the poll to a date to be specified later, and shall forthwith inform the retuming e
officer.
(2). Whenever a poll is adj oumed under sub-rule (1), the returning officer 4
shall immediately report the circumstances to the '{[concerned Commissioner, ;
- Gurdwara Elections and the. Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections and
shall, as soon as may be, with the approval of the Chief Commissioner,
Gurdwara Elections] appoint the day on which the poll shall recommence and
fix the hours during which the poll will be taken and the votes cast at that -
; polling station shall not be counted until such adjourned poll shall have been
h completed : ,
provided that no adjourned poll shal] be taken if the difference between
‘the votes secured by the two candidates who have obtained the largest number |
of votes is-more, than the total number of voters entitled to vote at such a
polling station. |
2(50 Programme for counting of votes.-(1} The Chief Commissioner ;
Gurdwara Elections may direct as to whether the counting of votes is to be |
done at the polling station itself after the close of the poll or ata different date, |
time and place.
}
(2) The Returning Officer will appoint constituency-wise number of }
persons as he may deem necessary to be known as Counting Supervisors and :
Counting Assistants to assist him m counting of votes. .
_. 3) Where the counting is to be done at a place other than the polling
station the Presiding Officer will seal the ballot boxes and election papers in
accordance with the provisions of these rules and as per further directionsof. -*
the Chief Commissioner Gurdwara Elections and deposit the same at the:
.
'Substituted,—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th
July, 1978. :
2nserted,-vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. G.S.R. 278(E), dated 4th April,
2002. .

[PAGE 31]
place fixed for this purpose by the Returning Officer for safe custody.

(4) Where the counting is to be done by the Returning Officer, reference
to the Presiding Officer in rule 50, 51 and 52 shall be construed as a reference
to the Returning Officer. ;

. 50-A. Intimation of time and place for counting of votes.—
Where the counting of votes is to be done by the Returning Officer, he shall,
at least seven days before the date or the first of the dates, fixed for poll,

’ appoint the place or places where counting of votes will be done and the date

| and time at which counting will be done and shall give notice of the same in

| writing to each candidate or his election agent:

: Provided that if for any reason the Returning Officer finds it
necessary and expedient to do so, he may alter the date, time and place
so fixed and inform by giving notice of the same to each candidate or his
election agent. |

50-B. Appointment of counting agents and revocation of such
appointment.—(1) Each contesting candidate shall, subject to such general
or special direction as the Commissioner Gurudwara Election may issue in
this behalf, appoint one Counting Agent, for each polling station, one Counting
Agent for the table of the Returning Officer if counting is to take place at a
different place from the polling station and one counting agent for each of the |
tables on which counting of votes is to be done.

(2) Every such appointment shall be made in Form VHI-A in duplicate,
one copy of which shall be forwarded to the Returning Officer and the second
shall be made over to the Counting Agent for production at the place of
counting. ,

. (3) No Counting Agent shall be admitted into the place fixed for counting
unless he has delivered to the Returning Officer or the Presiding Officer, as

' the case may be, his copy of appointment letter after duly completing and
signing the declaration contained therein and receiving from the Returning
Officer or the Presiding Officer an authority for entry into the place fixed for
counting.

(4) The appointment of a Counting Agent can be revoked in Form
VIILB and lodged with Returning Officer or the Presiding Officer, as the
case may be, and in the event of any such revocation, the candidate may

[PAGE 32]
make a fresh appointment in his place. :
50-C. Admission to the place fixed for counting.—(1) The
Returning Officer or the Presiding Officer, as the case may be, shal] exclude
from the place fixed for counting of vote all persons except,—
, (a) suchpersons (to be known as Counting Supervisors and Counting '
Assistants) as he may appoint to assist him in counting;
(b) _ persons authorised by the Chief Commissioner Gurudwara Elections
. Tt
orthe Commissioner Gurudwara elections;
(c) public servants on duty in connection with elections; and
(d) candidates, their election agents and counting agent: |
(2) No person who has been employed by or on behalf of, or has been |
otherwise working for a candidate in or about the election, shall be appointed |
under clause (a) of sub-rule (1). |
(3) The Returning Officer or the Presiding Officer, as the case may
be, shall decide which counting agent or agents shall watch the counting at ‘
any particular counting table or group of counting tables.
(4) Any person who during the counting of votes misconducts himself
or fails to obey the lawful directions of the Returning Officer or the Presiding
officer, may be removed from the place where the votes are being counted by
the Returning Officer or by any Police Officer on duty or by any person
authorised in this behalf by the Returning Officer. ]
'[50-D} ?{Counting of votes]-Immediately after the formalities referred
to in sub-rules (1) and (2) of rule 47 are completed, the presiding officer shall
proceed with the counting of votes as follows:- ,
(a) he shall allow the candidates and their agents, who may be present,
to inspect all seals on the ballot-box or ballot-boxes used at the
polling station and satisfy them that they are in order. ‘
(b) He shall satisfy himself that none of the ballot-boxes has been
tampered with.
a
‘Re-numbered.—vide Ministry of Home Affairs, Notification No. G.S.R. 278(E), dated 4th
April, 2002.
2Marginal Heading substituted,—vide ibid.

[PAGE 33]
(c) If the Presiding Officer is satisfied that any ballot-box has been
tampered with, he shall not count the ballot-papers contained in
any ballot-box used at the polling station and shall follow the
procedure laid down in rule 48.
(d) It the Presiding Officer is satisfied that all the ballot-boxes used at
’
the polling station are intact and have net been tampered with, he
shall open them and take out ihe ballot-papers contained therein
‘ and allow the candidates and their agents, who may be present, te
inspect the boxes and satisfy them that they are empty.

51. Scrutiny and rejection of ballot-papers.—(1) The ballot-papers
so taken out shail be arranged in convenient bundles and scrutinised. In case
where in an election two kinds of beilot-papers have been issued as prescribed
in sub-rule (2) of rule 39, they shall be dealt with under this sub-rule seperately
and procedure laid dowa in the follewing sub-rules followed im each case.

(2) The Presiding Officer shai! reject a ballot-paper: ~

(a) if it bears any mark or writing by which the elector can be

identified ; or

(b) if it isa spurious ballot-paper ; or

(c) ifithas been so damaged or mutilated that its identity as a genuine

ballot-paper cannot be established ; or

(d) ifit bearsa serial number, or is of a design, different from the serial

numbers or the design, as the case may be, of the ballot-papers
authorised for use at the particular polling station ; or
‘ (ec) if it does not bear any mark which it should have bome under the
provisions of rule 27 ; or
(1) if votes are given on it in favour of more than one candidate ; or
é
(g) if ne vote is recorded thereon ; or
(h) if the mark indicating the vote is placed on the ballot-paper in such |
a manner as to make it doubtful to which candidate the vote has
been given.
(3) Before rejecting any ballot-paper under sub-rule (2), the Presiding

[PAGE 34]
34 |
|
Officer shail allow each candidate, his election agent and one of the other
agents, who may be present, reasonable opportunity to inspect the ballotpaper, but shall not allow them to handle it or any other ballot-paper.
(4) The Presiding Officer shail endorse the letter “R* on every ballotpaper which he rejects and shall keep a brief record in Form IX of every case '
ofrejection.
(5) All ballot-papers used at the polling station which are rejected under
this rule shail be kept in a separate packet. .
52. Counting of valid vetes.— (1) Every ballot-paper which is not
rejected under rule 51 shall be deemed to be valid and the votes recorded
thereon shall be counted.
(2) The Presiding Officer shall prepare a result sheet in Form X in
respect of all ballot-papers taken out of the ballot-boxes :
Provided that in a constituency having a reserved seat separate resuit
sheets shall be maintained for the non-reserved seat and reserved seat.
i
(3) After the counting of votes recorded on the ballot-papers contained
in the ballot-boxes used at the polling station has been completed and the
entry in respect thereof made in Form X, the Presiding Officer shail announce
the particulars in such entry.
(4) After such announcement has been made, a candidate or, in his
absence, his election or counting agent may apply in writing tc the Presiding
Officer for a recount of all or any of the ballot-papers already counied stating
the grounds on which he demands such recount.
(5) On such an application being made, the Presiding Officer shall ‘
decide the matter and may allow the application in whole or in part or may
reject it in toto if it appears to him to be frivolous or unreasonable.
>
(6) Every decision of the Presiding Officer under sub-rule (5) shail be
in writing and contain the reasons thereof.
(7) If the Presiding Officer decides under sub-rule (5) to allow an |
application either in whole or in part, he shall — ,
(a) count the ballot-papers again in accordance with his decision ; |
|

[PAGE 35]
(b) amend the result sheet to the extent necessary after such

recount ; and

(c) announce the amendments so made by him.

(8) After the particulars of entry have been announced under subrule (3) or, in case of recount, under sub-rule (7), the Presiding Officer shall
sign the result sheet and no application for a recount shall be entertained

, thereafter.

(9) After the result sheet has been signed by the Presiding Officer, the
ballot-papers shall be kept in a sparate packet which shall be sealed and on
which shall be recorded the following particulars, namely —

(a) the name of the constiuency ;

(b) the particulars of the polling station where the ballot-box(es) was/ |

were used ;

(c) the names of the candidates ; and

(d) the date of the poll.

(10) Each packet of rejected ballot-papers referred to in sub-rule (5) of
rule 51 shall be sealed and the particulars specified in sub-rule (9) shall be
recorded thereon.

53. Declaration of elected candidates and Procedure in case of
equality of votes. (1) The Presiding Officer shall forward the packets
containing the valid and rejected ballot-papers and the account of votes cast
in favour of each candidate in Form X referred to in rule 52 to the Returning
Officer immediately.

x (2) On the date fixed for the declaration of result, the Returning Officer
shall open the covers containing the ballot-papers returned to him under rule
44, take out the ballot paper(s) from each such cover and shall scrutinize the

‘ same in the manner laid down in rule 51, the ballot-papers rejected by the
Returning Officer shall be kept by him in a separate packet.

(3) the returning officer shall then count the votes recorded on the
ballot-papers not rejected by him under sub-rule (2) and prepare a result sheet
in Form X.

(4) After the counting of votes recorded on the ballot-papers have

[PAGE 36]
been completed and the entry in respect thereof made in Form X, the returning
officer shall announce the particulars in such entry.
(5) After all the valid votes recorded on the ballot-papers have been
counted, they shail be kept in a separate packet which shall be sealed and on
which shail be recorded the following particulars, namely :---
+
(a) the name of the constituency ;
(b) the names of the candidates ; and
f
(c) the date of counting.
(6) The packet of rejecied ballot-papers referred to in sub-rule (2)
shall be seated and the particulars specified in sub-rule (5) shall be recorded
thereon.
(7) The Returning Officer shail then consolidate the resuit in Form XI
from the result sheets received by him from ail the Presiding Officers in the
constituency and the result sheet prepared by him under sub-rute (3) and shai]
declare it in the following manner :---
(a) The candidate who is found to have obtained the largest number of '
valid votes shall be declared to have been eiected :
Provided that the results for non-reserved and reserved seats shai! be |
|
prepared and announced separately. |
(b) Uf, after the counting of votes, tie is found to exist between any
candidates, and the addition of one vote will entitle any of those
candidates to be dectared elected, that shail forthwith be decided
between those candidates by tot, and the caudidate on whom the
lot falls shall be considered to have received an additional vote and
shall be declared to be duiy elected. ‘
54. Return of resuit of election and publication of names of
elected persons in Gazette— (1) When the counting of votes has been
concluded and the result has been declared, the Returning Officer shall prepare ‘
and '[forward to the Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections], a return showig
the names of the candidates, the number of valid votes recorded for each and
'Suhstitured for the words “Forwarded to the State Government and the Commissioner,
Gurdwara Elections” ~- vide Ministry of Home Affair’s Notification No. GS.R. 382(E),
dated 26th July, 1978.

[PAGE 37]
the name and address of the elected candidate, and shal! post a copy of the
return in a conspicuous place at his office:

Provided that in a constituency where there is a reserved seat, two
separate returns, i.e., one for the candidates for the non-reserved seat and
another for the reserved seat shall be prepared, forwarded and posted:

ca

‘Provided further that, except where a constituency extends over more

then one State, the returning officer shall forward the return or returns, as the
. case may be, to the concemed Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections also.]

(2) After such returns have been received from all the returning officers,
the 2[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections] shall publish the names of the
persons so elected in the Official Gazette *[of the State or States concerned].

55. Procedure when a candidate is elected by mere than one
constitaency.— (1) If any person is elected by more than oe constituency,
he shall, by notice in writing signed by him and delivered io the {Chief

| Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections], within seven days from the date of the
| publication of the results of such election in the Official Gazette, choose for
which of these constituencies he shail serve.

(2) If the candidate does not make the choice referred to in sub-rule
(1) of this rule within the prescribed time, the *[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara
Elections] shall, within fourteen days from the date of the publication of the
result of such election, declare for which constituency he shail serve. The
choice under sub-rule (1) or declaration, as the case may be, shail be conclusive.

(G) When any such choice of declaration has been made, ihe *[Chief
Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections], shall cali upon the constituency or
constituencies for which such person has not chosen or been declared to

‘ serve, to elect another person or persons.

56. Custody, production and inspection of election papers.— (1)

The returning officer shall seal up the parcels of issued and un-issued bailot-

« —___ papers, and such parcels together with all other parcels received fron the polling
Inserted, —vide Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No. G.S.R. 379(E), dated 23rd
August, 1996.
Substituted for the words “State Government” — vide Ministry of Home A ffair’s Notification
No. GS.R. 382(F), dated 26th July, 1978
3Substituted for the words “State Government” — vide Ministry of Home A ffair’s Notification
ibid.

}

[PAGE 38]
stations shall remain in his coustody until the expiry of one year from the date of
the election when they shall be destroyed subject to any direction to the contrary
made by the '[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections and, where there is no
Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections the Central Government] or by a
competent court or by Tribunal appointed to hold an enquiry into an election.
(2) While in the custody of the returning officer, the packet of ballotpapers, whether valid, rejected or tendered and of the marked copy of the
electoral roll shall not be opened and their contents shall not be inspected by .
or produced before, any person or authority except under the order of a
competent court or of a Tribunal. All other papers relating to the election shall |
be open to public inspection subject to such conditions and to the payment of
such fee, ifany as the '[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections and, where
there is no Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Election the Central Government} |
may direct. |
(3) Copies of returns forwarded by the returning officers under rule
54 shall be furnished by the ?[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections], on
payment of a fee of two rupees for each such copy. ;
§7. Procedure for filling vacancies When a vacancy occurs among
the elected members of the Board by the death, resignation or removal! of any
member and a new member has to be elected in his place in accordance with
the provision of section 53 of the Act, such election shail be conducted in the
manner prescribed in these rules for a general election and the programme of |
the election shall be framed as soon as may be convenient after the occurrence |
ofthe vacancy and the electoral roll in force under the provisions ofrule 11 shall :
be deemed to be the electoral roll for the purpose of holding the election.
58. Final authority for interpretation of these rules.— If any ; |
question arises regarding the interpretation of these rules otherwise than in |
connection with an election petition which has actually been presented, the )
question shall be referred to the '[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections], ‘
who may decide it himself, or, if he thinks fit, may refer it to the '[Central |
Government.] The decision of the '[Chief Commissioner, Gurdwara Elections]. |
TSubstituted for the words “Commissioner Gurdwara Elections” — vide Ministry of Home |
Affair’s Notification No. GS.R. 382¢F), dated 26th July; 1978 :
Substituted for the words “Commissioner Gurdwara Elections” — vide Ministry of Home |
A ffair’s Notif.cation ibid.

[PAGE 39]
or the ‘[Central Government], as the case may be, shail be final.
59. Repeai.— The Sikh Gurdwaras Board Election Rules, 1954, are
hereby repealed :
Provided that any order made, notification issued or anything done or
’ any action taken under any of the said rules shall be deemed to have been
made, issued, done or taken under the corresponding provisions of these rules.
t
€
CO
iSubstituted for the words “Commissioner Gurdwara Elections” -~ vide Ministry of Home
Affair’s Notification No. GS.R. 382(E), dated 26th July, 1978.

[PAGE 40]
'FORM 1 (FOR KESHADHARI SIKH)
[RULE 3(1}}
Ro «Sn Wife/Daughter
of | age séReesidence
- _ _______ hereby declare that | —- ‘
(a) ama Keshadhari Sikh ;
(b) do not trim or shave my beard or keshas : a
(c) do not smoke or use kutha (Halai) meat, in any form ; |
(d)_ do not take alcoholic drinks ; and |
!
(e) am nota *patit . 2
Signature/T humb Mark**
*Patit means a person, who being Keshadhari Sikh trims or shaves his beard
or Keshas or who after taking Amrit commits any one or more of the four
Kurahits.
[Section 2(11) of the Act.]
**In case of an illiterate. he should repeat the declaration, as read out
from the Form, and then thumb-mark the Form '{Proviso to rule 3 sub-rule
()). 1
(Further declaration to be made by a Scheduled Caste Applicant.)
{ hereby declare that I am a member of the __ _ ;
caste which has been declared to be a Scheduled Caste under Article 341 of
the Constitution.
Signature/Thumb Mark**
ee
'Substituted, —vide Ministry of Home Affair’s Notification No. GS.R. 302(E), dated 30th
March, 1995

[PAGE 41]
‘FORM IA (FOR SEHAJDHARI SiicH)
{RULE 3(1)]
i Son/wife/Daughter
7 of age Residence
hereby declare that
Tam a Sehajdhari Sikh and I —
, (a) perform ceremonies according to Sikh rites;
(b) do not use tabacco or kutha (Halal) meat, in any form ;
(c) donotuse alcoholic drinks ;
(d) am nota *patit ; and
(e) can recite moolmantar.
Signature/Thumb Mark**
*Patit means a person, who being Keshadhari Sikh trims or shaves his beard
or Keshas or who after taking Amrit commits any one or more of the four
Kurahits.
[Section 2(11) of the Act.]
**Tn case of an illiterate, he should repeat the declaration, as read out
from the Form, and then thumb-mark the Form ‘[Proviso to sub-rule (1)].
‘ (Further declaration to be made by a Scheduled Caste Applicant.)
T hereby declare that | am a member of the
‘ caste which has been declared to be a Scheduled Caste under Article 341 of
the Constitution.
Signature/Thumb Mark**
“Incerted, —-vide Ministry of Home Affair’s Notification No. GS.R. 302(E), dated 30th
March, 1995.

[PAGE 42]
5s weeere |
° RBeeEs
Sel 552
B2G2838 8
CSC ED ce
SS&Esa e286 £2
QPeeeet esa
Hos SEES!
§ 2e ,
&® 85 |
> >
Rou es
Acres foe) |
3 a
3 ,
oO
2, ’
>
lo
RS) na = |
8 |
S &
o
2 a|8 |
= =
Ed I
5 = ©
eo
= ls, |
{s) ss >
eo |e | #¢ee88 |
= ® a Adve sss Fey
= in te y
2 5 i Sone anna ETE
Bus |e { |
os & c H |
2a 2 oS =
ri Zz
Ew oO s&s 5
& as Se g |
£Gos es = |
SER BSu0ES
Z22s go 2 5 i
2a gZ2 BLkeEeBe | t
6 |\©S& lee S ete |
oO ae SES FHS
ete ewe
| eoPFOES
| OGL aia a
|
H
= |
| SES |
s88 |
i Sw
so is
Ee pgs:
Seas i
“zc OD isp)
g
: & 2 .
=
2 z Ss
o| ©8838
cS ce RB
S| 3286
ca EF sels ~N
3 .
GBS .
naz _

[PAGE 43]
@
Sm & ao
a2. 2 8,5
So = 2 5
S52 Bes SGLsSEtnn
AB PRES ZHLGSAVMVS EBD ise)
YOonoerstosfsoerezt as a
©
5 a2
@
5 $
€ > 3% ~N
AS zt QQ
Ks}
ae
, 5 |e =
G
Oo
|g
~ << gL
S
+) s .
= wn
c= ~5s 2 $8
3S 2 Se
Font o2to &&
8 Seek t Ba
oO ASEBSES
c GEaGOa.
= 2
So |3 = Bx
“18 ze 85
® ie | |B8e5 Rae 8
2 ae | zfBageasd co
= !
— ® 3°
Eig 2 |
mY in Eo
‘ an —
2 3
so 5 SBw. SBe 3 cs @
ruse s 2eovoe ss @ soe
aa EOPE B+ > e oD 0)
958 s SSExnS Se 5c G82 8
uY G& rou Z2E8RFSRBSFSERSESIR
Ssl |
Ses 4)
2Ex55 fa ao]
Bags SS 2x2
6 joe SsgoeoecsS _ BS
@D SEGQESREBRSE
a ®REeEeagE 2 =ESE
BSsesasas
QOcgcGLLABStse
2 S 5S.
2 o 2 oS
SESSESL SE
' 2GEC08 5 F868 EE wo
ao]
f . 2
oO -
2 GW
f=) as
Cle &&
fra Sc
gizes st
‘ 2
Sie
ow
Zise
Olc a
Bis ioe)
2 ~
< i
Sif 8 |
Sisoe |S50 f
Sie FS if 2s
ov se SSB Ss NN
8 .
BO
Oa —_

[PAGE 44]
FORM IV
(RULE 15)
Nomination Paper
Election to the Sikh Gurdwaras Board
EEE OS OO
(To be filied by the proposer} ‘
I hereby nominate as a candidate
for election from the Board constituency _
t
1. Full name of proposer
2. Serial number of proposer in the elctoral roll of the constituency in
which the candidate is being nominated for election
and name of Thana or Zail/Patwar
Circle _ Town __ _
3. Name of the candidate’s Father/Husband
4. Full postal address of candidate
5. Censtituency on electoral roll of which the candidate 1s registered
asan elector.
6. Number of the candidate on the electoral roll of the constituency in
which he is registered as elector ;
and name of Thana or Zail/Patwar Circle
Town
*Signature of proposer
Date —_— . ‘
*Signature includes thumb-impression.
Note.~This nomination paper will not be valid unless it is delivered by ‘
the candidate either in person or by his proposer or by an agent appointed by
authority in writing signed by the candidate and verified by a Magistrate, sub- |
registrar, sarpanch, nayaye pradhan, lambardar or mernber of Legislature or
local body to the Returning Officer or other person authorised to receive it at )
his office within the prescribed time. |
Continued.- 2 -
|
|

[PAGE 45]
-2-
(To be filled by the candidate)
[ DECLARATION ]
I, the above-mentioned candidate, assent to this nomination and hereby
‘ declare:-
(a) That I have completed years of age:
, ‘[(b) that I do not suffer from any of the ineligibilities enumerated in
Section 45 of the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925;]
(c} that the symbols I have chosen are in order of preference:-
@Q
@M ard
Gy
Date_ ee Signature of Candidate
{ (Further declaration to be made by a Scheduled Caste Candidate)
I hereby declare that 1 am a member of the
caste which has been declared to be a Scheduled Caste for the State of
Punjab.
Date_ _ ee .
Signature of Candidate
Attested :
Magistrate
: (To be filled by the Returning Officer)
: Serial number of nomination paper
‘This nomination was delivered to me at my office at (hour)
t on ———CSCsC atte) by the candidate/proposer/duly authorised agent.
Date Returning Officer
'‘Substituted,—Vide Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No. G.S.R. 302(E), dated 30th
March, 1995.
Contd. - 3 -

[PAGE 46]
46 |
-3-
Decision of Returning Officer accepting or rejecting the nomination |
paper.
Lhave scrutinised the eligibility of the candidate and proposer and find
that they are respectively qualified to stand for election and to propose the ‘
nomination and, therefore accept the nomination;
|
or a
I have scrutinised this nomination and reject it for the following
reasons:- |
Date_ Signature of Officer |
Scrutinising the nomination |
The symbol assigned to the candidate is ;
: oo F
Signature of Returning Officer
ee
Receipt for nomination paper and notice of scrutiny
(To be handed over to the person presenting the nomination paper) ;
Serial number of nomination paper,
nomination paper of a candidate
for election from the___ Board constituency, was
delivered to me at my office at (hour) on ; (date) .
by the candidate/proposer/duly authorised agent. All nomination papers will
be taken up for scrutiny at (hour) on (date) .
at place).
Date ee Returning Officer |
;

[PAGE 47]
‘| FORM IV-A |
{ See rule 20(1) }
Notice of Withdrawal of Candidature to be given by the candidate
; (Election to the Sikh Gurdwara Board)
The Returning Officer
% I a (candidate validly nominated
at the above election) do hereby give notice that I withdraw my candidature.
- Place:
Date_ _ Signature of validly
nominated candidate
This notice was delivered to me at my office at (hour)
on _ (date) by (name)
the
Date Returning Officer
oo
Receipt of Notice of Withdrawal
(To be handed over to the person delivering the notice)
The notice of withdrawal of candidature by__ _

‘ a (validly nominated candidate) at the election to the Sikh Gurdwaras Board
was delivered to me by the at my office
at (hour) on __(date).

€

Returning Officer
a
‘Forms JV-A, 1V-B, [V-C, !V-D, 1V-E and TV-F added, ~ vide Ministry of Home Affairs
Notification No. G.S.R. 278(E), dated 4th April, 2002.

[PAGE 48]
|
|
| FORM IV-B j |
{ See rule 20(1) } |
Notice of Withdrawal of Candidature to be given by the Returning Officer
Election to the Sikh Gurdwara Board
‘
Notice is hereby given that the following validly nominated candidate!
candidates at the above election withdraw his candidature/their candidatures
today:- ,
Naine of Address of Remarks
(validly nominated (validly nominated
candidate} candidate)
1,
2.
3.
ete.
Dated Returning Officer.
{ FORM IV-C }
| See rule 25-Af1) ]
Appointment of Election Agent
To
The Returning Officer. .
Ro sont \
candidate at the election of the membership of the Board do hereby
appoint _ son of __
of, as my election agent from this day at the
above election.
Place ee
Date Signature of the Candidate.

[PAGE 49]
: 49
[ FORM IV-D ]
[ See rule 25-A(2) |
Revocation of appointment of ElectionAgent
‘To

’ The Returning Officer,

r lo son of _ a
candidate at the election of membership of the Board do hereby revoke
the appointment of Shri SOT
of EL ene
my election agent.

Place 7
Date Signature of ihe Candidaice.
FOR iV-E
{ See Rule 25-Bi7) }
Appointment of Polling Agent

<3)
ef ___ candidate at the election cf membership
of the Board da hereby appoint
(Name and address)
a Polling Agent to attend Polling Station No. .
ats séptace fixed for the Poll ato
Place
Date Signature of the candidate.

‘ Lo sn of

of agree to act as such Polling Agent.
Declaration of the Polling Agent to be signed before the Presiding officer.
¢
[hereby declare that at the above election, I will not do anything forbidden
by Section 151 of the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925, which I have read/has been
read over to me.
Date Signature of the Polling Agent.
Signed before me.
Date Presiding Officer.

[PAGE 50]
FORM IV-F
[ See rule 25-B(3) | |
{
Revocation of appointment ef Pelling Agent |
To
|
The Presiding Officer, )
i, son of a an
candidate at the election of the membership of the Board hereby revoke |
the appointment of __ my |
{
polling agent. |
{
Place _ _ i
_——— ,
Date Signature of the Candidate.
{
FORM V |
(Rule 41) 7
Tendered Ballet Paper

Serial No. . |

Biection for Constituency
ee” a |
Polling Station |
Name of voter |
:
No. in electoral roll
Name of candidate or candidates for whom this is tendered: |
(a) for non-reserved seat ; yo
(b) for reserved seat _
oe |
Date _ Signature of the Presiding Officer.

[PAGE 51]
FORM VI
(Rule 41)
Tendered Votes List
Polling Station
’ Name of Name of No. in Signature of
constituency voter electoral voter, if literate,
roll or thumb-
3 impression, if
illiterate with
his address
Date Signature of the Presiding Officer.
FORM VIE
(Rule 42)
List of Challenged Votes
Polling Station___
Signature Sheet No.
Name of Number Name Signature Name of Order of
consti- on ofvoter, identifier,if Presiding
tuency electoral ifliterate, any Officer (in
4 roll or thumb- each case}
impression
of voter, if
t literate
Date. Signature of the Presiding Officer. ;

[PAGE 52]
$2
FORM VIL
[(Rule 47(1)]} |
Account of Ballot Papers
Constituency ,
Polling Station, ‘
District
BALLOT PAPERS ‘
Serial No.
Particulars To
From To Total
Received . Nonreserved
seat .
Reserved
seat .
Issued . Nonreserved
seat .
Reserved
seat -
Unissued .. Nonreserved
seat .
Reserved
seat .
ACCOUNT OF TOTAL BALLOT PAPERS ISSUED
Total Total retumed Balance total in ‘
issued spoilt ballot box(es)
OO
Non-reserved |
seat +
Reserved
seat . |
se
|
|

[PAGE 53]
$3
TENDERED BALLOT PAPERS
Serial No.
From To Total
‘ Received .
Issued
7 Unissued .
ACCOUNT OF TOTAL TENDERED BALLOT PAPERS ISSUED
Total returned Balance total
Total issued spoilt in parcel
Date Signature of the Presiding Officer.
|
f

[PAGE 54]
‘| FORM VILLA |
[ See rule 50-B(2) |
Appointment of Counting Agent
Election to the Sikh Gurdwara Board

To ‘

The Reterning Officer,

8 | of |
a candidate at the election of membership of the Board, do hereby appoint |
the following persons as my counting agents to attend the counting of votes
at
i RL, !
Name of the Counting Agents Address of the Counting Agent :
an OE
i.
“ae ! |
etc. |
ee
We agree to act as such |
counting agents Signature of candidate |
an
1. |
2. .
etc.
5 |
Place
Date Signature(s) of Counting Agents. |

Ko ston of uy
of accept my above appointment.
Place = nN
Date Signature of the Election Agent.
Approved Signature and seal of the

Returning Officer
‘Forms VIHI-A and VIII-B added, — vide Ministry of Home Affairs Notification No. GSR.
No. 278(E) dated 4th April, 2002.
Contd. - 2 -

[PAGE 55]
-2-
DECLARATION OF COUNTING AGENTS
(To be signed before the Returning Officer)

‘ I/We hereby declare that at the above election we will not do anything
forbidden by Section 151 of the Sikh Gurdwaras Act, 1925 which I/We have
read/has been read over to us.

, L
2.

3.
etc.
Date Signature of Counting Agent(s).
Signed before me
Date
Assistant Returning Officer/
Retuming Officer.
;

[PAGE 56]
FORM VII-B
[ (See Rule 50-B(4) }
Revocation of Appointment of Counting Agent
Election to the Sikh Gurdwara Board
To t
The Returning Officer,
ig
I, son of.
a candidate at the election of membership of the Board hereby revoke the
appointment of, my counting agent.
Place
Date |
Signature of Candidate. t
a

[PAGE 57]
FORM IX
[Rule 51(4)]
Record of Rejected Ballot-Papers
5 Election to the Sikh Gurdwaras Board from
«Constituency
’ Serial Number and Name of Polling Station oe
Serial Sertal Brief Serial Serial Brief
No. of No.of — grounds No.of Ne.of — grounds
entry Ballot- of entry ballot- of
paper rejection paper rejection
|
, oo .
Place _
Date_ Signature of Presiding Officer.

[PAGE 58]
FORM X
[(Rule 52(2) and 53(3)]
Result Sheet
Election to the Sikh Gurdwaras Board from
Constituency ‘
Serial Number and Name of Polling Station
NN
Serial Name of Number Number Total ‘
No. candidate of valid of number of
votes rejected votes
votes
ee
ee
’
Place >
Date__ a Signature of Presiding Officer/
Returning Officer.
|
|
|
|
}
|
F

[PAGE 59]
FORM Xi
{(Rule 53(7)1
Final Result Sheet
i Election to the Sikh Gurdwaras Board from
Constituency
nn EE
? Polling Station Number of Number of votes polled
valid votes
cast in
favour of
oe _ Remarks
Serial Name ABCD Valid Rejected Total for
No. Polling
Station
ee TUITE
t
Votes polled by
post
ee
Total number of
votes polled in
the constituency
> nn rr
Place.
‘ Date_ _ Signature of Returning Officer.
PGP. MOHALI/6788-11/09-2009(31