[PAGE 1]
jftLVªh la‚ Mh ¼Mh,u½ 127@88 REGISTERED NO. D(DN) 127/88

lR;esolR;esolR;esolR;esolR;eso t;rst;rst;rst;rst;rs Hkkjr dk jkti=k
The Gazette of India
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II&&&[k.M I
PART II --Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf’kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

la‚ 57] ubZ fnYyh] 'kqÛokj] flrEcj] 2] 1988@Hkknz 11] 1910
No. 57] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1988/BHADRA 11, 1910

bl Hkkx esa fHkUUk i`"V la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed
as a separate compilation.

MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 2nd September, 1988/Bhadra 11, 1910 (Saka)

The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President
on the 1st September, 1988, and is hereby published for general information :-
THE RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS (PREVENTION OF
MISUSE) ACT, 1988
No. 41 OF 1988
[1st September, 1988.]
An Act to prevent the misuse of religious institutions for political and
other purposes.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:- Short
1. (1) This Act may be called the Religious Institutions (Prevention title,
of Misuse) Act, 1988. extent
and com- (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and mence- Kashmir. ment.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of
May, 1988.
Defini- 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,tions.
54 of 1959. (a) “ammunition” shall have the same meaning as in clause (b)
of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Arms Act, 1959.

[PAGE 2]
2. THE CAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II-

(b) “arms “ shall have the same meaning as in clause (c)
of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Arms Act, 1959. 54 of 1959
(c) “manager”, in relation to a religoius institution, means every
person, including any religious functionary (by whatever name
called), Who, for the time being, either alone or in association with
other persons, administers, managers or otherwise controls the affairs
of that institution, its functions or properties.
(d) “political activity” includes any activity promoting or propagating the aims or objects of a political party or any cause, issue or
question of a political nature by organising meetings, demonstrations,
processions, collection or disbursement of funds, or by the issue of
disretions or decrees, or by any other means, and includes also such
activity by or on behalf of a person seeking election as a candidate
for any election to Parliament, any State Legislature or any local
authority.
(e) “political party” means an association or body of persons-
(i) which is, or is deemed to be, registered, with the Election
Commission of India as a political party under the Election
Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968, as in force
for the time being. or
(ii) which has set up candidates for election to any legislature, but is not registered, or deemed to be registered, as a
political party, under the Election Symbols (Reservation and
Allotment) Order, 1968. or
(iii) organised to carry on any political activity or to acquire or exercise political power through election or otherwise.
(f) “religious institution” means an institution for the promotion of any religion or persuasion, and includes any place or premises used as a place of public religious worship, by whatever
Prohibition name or designation known.
of use of 3. No religious institution or manager thereof shall use or allow the
religious use of any premises belonging to, or under the control of, the institution-institutions
for certain (a) for the promotion or propagation of any political activity. or
purposes, (b) for the harbouring of any person accused or convicted of an
offence under any law for the time being in force; or
(c) for the storing of any arms or ammunition. or
(d) for keeping any goods or articles in contravention of any
law for the time being in force. or
(e) for erecting or putting up of any construction or fortification, including basements, bunkers, towers or walls without a valid
licence or permission under any law for the time being in force; or
(f) for the carrying on of any unlawful or subversive act prohibited under any law for the time being in force or in contravention
of any order made by any court. or
(g) for the doing of any act which promotes or attempts to
promote disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between
defferent religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or
communities. or

[PAGE 3]
SEC. 1] THE CAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3

(h) for the carrying on of any activity prejudicial to the
sovereighty, unity and integrity of India. or
(i) for the doing of any act in contravention of the provisions
69 of 1971. of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
4. No religious institution or manager thereof shall allow the entry Restricof any arms or ammunition or of any peson carrying any arms or tions on
carrying ammunition into the religious institution : arms and
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to- ammuni-
(a) the wearing and carrying of a kirpan by any person profes- tion into
sing the Sikh religion. or a rell-
(b) any arms which are used as part of any religious ceremoney gious
institu- or ritual of the institution as established by custom or usage. tion.
5. No religious institution or manager thereof shall use or allow the Prohibition of use of any funds or other properties belonging to, or under the control of, use of
the institution for the benefit of any political party or for the purpose funds of
of any political activity or for the commission of any act which is religious
punishable as an offence under any law. institutions for
certain
activities.
6. No religious institution or manager thereof shall allow any cere- Prohibimony, festivel, congregation, procession or assembly organised or held tion of
under its auspices to be used for any political activity. religious
fora for
propagating political ideas.
7. Where any religious institution or manager thereof contravenes Penalthe provisions of section3, section 4, section 5 or section 6, the manager ties.
and every person connocted with such contravention shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.
8. (1) Any manager or other employee of a religious institution shall, Disqualiupon conviction for an offence under this Act, stand removed from his fication of
persons office or post and shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary con- convicted
tained in any other law, be disqualified for appointment in any religious or chargeinstitution as manager or in any other capacity for a period of six years sheeted
from the date of his conviction. under
(2) Where any manager or other employee of a religious institution this Act.
is accused of an offence under this Act and a charge-sheet for the prosecution of such person is filed in any court and the court is of the opinion,
after considering the charge-sheet and after hearing the prosecution and
the accused, that a prima facie case exists, it shall pass an order or direction restraining the person from exercising the powers or discharging
the duties of his office or post pending trial.
(3) Where any manager or other employee has been removed under
sub-section (1), or restrained under sub-section (2), the vacancy arising
out of such removal or restraint may be filled in the manner provided in
the law applicable to the said religious institution.

[PAGE 4]
4 THE CAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II-SEC. 1]

Certain 9. Every manager or other employee of a religious institution shall be
persons bound to give information to the officer incharge of the police station withbound to in whose local jurisdiction the religious institution is situated of anygive incontra vention or any impending contravention of the provisions of this Actformation
to police. and any failure to do so shall be punishable under section 176 of the
Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860

Ord.Repeal 10. (1) The Religious Institution (Prevention of Misuse) Ordinance,
3 of 1988and 1988 is hereby repealed.
saving.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provisions of this Act.

S. RAMAIAH,
Secy. to the Govt. of India.

PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS. MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 1988