[PAGE 1]
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
% Reserved on: 7th May, 2026
Pronounced on: 4th August, 2026

# CNR No : DLHC010798882018

+ RSA 57/2018, CM APPL. 6551/2019

ARUN BIRLA
S/o Moolchand Birla
R/o 2nd Floor, C-1/E, Green Park Ext
New Delhi-110016
Through SPA
Nidhi Newar Biral .....Appellant
Through: Mr. Kunal Kalra, Advocate.

versus

1. NIRMAL SINGH
S/o Late Shri Khajan Singh
Upper Ground Floor,
C-1/E, Green Park Extension, New Delhi. .....Respondent No.1

2. YASHWANT JAIN
S/o J.M. Jain
G-6, Aashirwas Complex
D-1, Green Park, New Delhi. .....Respondent No.2
Through: Mr. Prashant Manchanda, Mr. Angad
Singh, Mr. Rohan Pratap Singh and
Mr. Varun, Advocates for R-1.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA
J U D G M E N T

NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA, J.

1. The Second Regular Appeal under Section 100 read with Order XLII

of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as „CPC‟), has

been filed on behalf of the Appellant against the Judgment and decree dated

RSA 57/2018 Page 1 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 2]
11.12.2017 of the learned District and Sessions Judge, New Delhi, who has

set aside the Judgment dated 20.07.2017 of the learned Civil Judge, Delhi,

who had restrained the Defendants/Appellants from creating

hindrance/obstruction in the use of the space on the lower Ground Floor, to

park the car by Plaintiff/Respondent No. 1.

2. The Plaintiffs, Mr. Deshraj Saluja and Mr. Arun Birla, had filed a

Civil Suit No. 26/2016, for directing the Defendant No. 1 to restore the

guardroom and kitchen on the lower Ground Floor; to remove the

construction/encroachment from the parking space in the lower Ground

Floor; to restrain the Defendant No. 1 from using the lower Ground Floor

portion for any other purpose than for guardroom and parking; to remove the

Third Floor of the Property in question; to restrain the Defendant No. 1 for

carrying out illegal and unlawful construction in the Property in question; to

restrain the Defendant No. 1 from permitting installation of a huge

transmission tower on the roof of the Third Floor of the Property in question

and to restrain the Defendant No. 1 from creating any hindrance/obstruction

in using the parking space of the Plaintiff marked as „P-3‟, in the Lower

Ground Floor and further to restrain the Defendant No. 1, from using the

parking space of the Plaintiff.

3. The facts in brief are that Sh. Som Dutt vide Sale Deed dated

19.11.1958, had purchased a freehold plot bearing No. C-1/E, admeasuring

360 Sq. Yds., situated at Green Park Extension, New Delhi. He sold the plot

to Sh. Khajan Singh vide Sale Deed dated 20.05.1961, who raised the

construction. Sh. Khajan Singh died on 28.01.1988, leaving behind the

registered Will dated 22.05.1980, bequeathing his property to his three sons,

namely, Sardar Pritam Singh, Sardar Balwant Singh and Sardar Nirmal

RSA 57/2018 Page 2 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 3]
Singh (Defendant No. 1). Sardar Pritam Singh died on 15.10.1995 and his

share was transferred to his wife, Smt. Surjeet Kaur. The Property was

divided amongst the three brothers, through a registered Family Settlement

dated 09.07.2004, by virtue of which, the Defendant No. 1 became the

absolute owner of the portion admeasuring 120 Sq. Yds.

4. The Defendant No. 1, Sardar Nirmal Singh, demolished the old

construction and reconstructed his portion wherein the lower Ground Floor

was kept for parking three big cars, as well as, guardroom with a toilet and

kitchen was constructed. The Defendant No. 1 executed the Sale Deed dated

12.07.2006 in respect of First Floor, in favour of Smt. Abhilasha Jain. In

addition to the portion on the First Floor, the Defendant No. 1 also

transferred one separate car parking on the lower Ground Floor to her. The

Plaintiff No. 1, Sh. Deshraj Saluja, purchased the First Floor from Smt.

Abhilasha Jain, by virtue of registered Sale Deed dated 29.06.2007.

5. The Second Floor of the Property along with one individual car

parking in the lower Ground Floor, was sold by Defendant No. 1, to Smt.

Kavita Jain vide registered Sale Deed dated 12.07.2006. She sold the Second

Floor to Smt. Anita Lubhana, through the registered Sale Deed dated

27.06.2007. The Plaintiff No. 2, Sh. Arun Birla, purchased the Second Floor

from Smt. Anita Lubhana, vide registered Sale Deed dated 11.07.2008

whereby he became the owner of the Second Floor and one individual car

parking on the lower Ground Floor. Although the Defendant No. 1 agreed to

sell the upper Ground Floor to the Defendant No. 2, but certain inter se

disputes arose between them and the sale documents have not been executed

as the upper Ground Floor is in the possession of the Defendant No. 1.

RSA 57/2018 Page 3 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 4]
6. It was claimed that the Defendant No. 1 got tempted to make unlawful

gains for himself by illegally permitting use of guardroom for commercial

activity. He allowed the Guard Room to be used for commercial use to M/s

Maruti Courier. He also unauthorisedly covered one car parking space,

which was meant for upper Ground Floor occupant and allowed it to be used

by one Tantarik. When Smt. Anita and the Plaintiff No. 1, raised objections

about this misuse, the portion given to the Tantarik, was taken back by the

Defendant No. 1. However, it has now been given to M/s Natural Hair

Weaving Centre, who are running their Hair Treatment Clinic, from this

portion.

7. The Plaintiff claimed that the lower Ground Floor was agreed to be

used for three car parking spaces, with one car parking given to each Floor

owner. The Defendant No. 1 has no right to use the guardroom and the

kitchen, for the commercial purpose.

8. It was claimed that the persons using these commercial spaces, were

not educated and most of them used filthy and abusive language even while

talking to themselves and making indecent gestures towards the women and

when they were requested to behave, they picked quarrels.

9. Since the Plaintiffs were repeatedly demanding from the Defendant

No. 1, to remove the encroachment and to stop the commercial use, the

Defendant No. 1, in retaliation, started giving threats to cause interference

and obstruction in the parking of vehicles of the Plaintiffs and their guests.

The roof of the building is meant for common facilities such as T.V.

antenna, Dish Antenna, Water tanks, drying of clothes etc. However, the

Defendant No. 1 is in the process of allowing M/s Reliance Communication,

to install a huge transmission tower on the roof of the Third Floor. The

RSA 57/2018 Page 4 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 5]
generator is also installed at the terrace, to provide non-stop electricity for

running this Tower. It is further claimed that the Third Floor has been raised

illegally, but the foundation is not strong to take such erection of

transmission Tower or the illegal construction.

10. The Plaintiffs thus, filed the present Suit seeking to restrain the

Defendants from illegal use of the lower Ground Floor, to raise

unauthorised construction and to restrain the Defendant No. 1 from creating

hindrance/obstruction in their using the car parking space in the lower

Ground Floor.

11. The Suit was contested by the Defendant No. 1, Sh. Nirmal Singh,

who took the preliminary objections that the dispute in regard to the subject

matter of the Property, is under consideration before the learned Arbitral

Tribunal, constituted pursuant to Arbitration Agreement dated 13.04.2005

between the Defendant No. 1, Sh. Nirmal Singh and the Defendant No. 2,

Sh. Yashwant Jain. The present Suit is, therefore, liable to be dismissed.

12. It is further claimed that this suit has been filed by the Plaintiffs at the

behest of the Defendant No. 2, to overreach the proceedings pending before

the Arbitral Tribunal. The material facts have been in deliberately concealed

by the Plaintiffs, who are not entitled to relief under the Specific Relief Act.

13. It is further submitted that the Plaintiffs have no locus standi to

maintain the Suit, against the Defendant No. 2. There is no cause of action

disclosed in the Plaint. Furthermore, the Plaintiffs have no personal interest

in the subject matter inasmuch as, the Ground Floor of the building has been

in the exclusive ownership/possession/control and use of the Defendant No.

1. The Suit has been filed mala fide and is not maintainable.

RSA 57/2018 Page 5 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 6]
14. On merits, the contents of the Plaint, were denied. It was claimed that

the Plaint has not disclosed any cause of action and is liable to be dismissed.

15. The Defendant No.1, Sh. Nirmal Singh, in his Written Statement

explained the background of the dispute in regard to the allotment of one car

parking space in the Lower Ground Floor. He stated that Defendant No.2,

Yashwant Jain who is in the business of real estate, had approached

Defendant No.1 Nirmal Singh in March, 2005 through a Property Dealer for

an Agreement with respect to the share of Defendant in property bearing

No.C-1/E, Green Park Extension, New Delhi and offered to raise four floor

building on the said property after erasing old construction existing and in

occupation of the Defendant No.1. The Defendant No.1 and 2 stated that the

whole process of construction of four floors, would take not more than nine

months to one year from the date of commencement of work. The estimated

cost of construction of the building with average modern amenities were

estimated by Defendant No.2 as approximately Rs.30 lakhs. Defendant No.2

agreed to pay the estimated cost of construction to Defendant No.1 and also

advanced sale consideration for the purchase of flats @ Rs.23 lakhs per

floor.

16. Thereafter, it was agreed that construction would be at Defendant

No.1‟s cost and that the construction would be carried out under the joint

supervision of both the parties. It was further agreed that the balance

amounts towards the sale of each floor, would be payable on completion of

construction, handing over of physical possession and on execution and

registration of the Sale Deed, after obtaining permission from the concerned

office in favour of Defendant No.2 or its nominee. It was specifically

agreed between Defendant No.1 and 2 that Ground Floor would be used for

RSA 57/2018 Page 6 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 7]
commercial purpose by Defendant No.1, his nominee/assignee and shall not

be subject of sale transaction between the parties.

17. Based upon these terms, Defendant No.1 entered into an Agreement

with Defendant No.2. However, the Defendant No.2 who is in the trade of

real estate, etc. fraudulently obtained signatures of Defendant No.1 on

various papers and documents from time to time, by wrongfully persuading

Defendant No.1 herein that all the documents were in accordance with the

terms and conditions as agreed above including the Agreement dated

13.04.2005.

18. The Defendant No.1 claimed that he, being an uneducated person who

could not read and understand any language except Gurumukhi, became a

victim of fraud of Defendant No.2 and his associates. Defendant No.2 on

the basis of misrepresentation that payment of balance amount would be

payable on the registration of Sale Deed, completed the construction of flats

and also modified the same, as suggested by Defendant No.1 from time to

time. The extra facility of lift and genset on 50:50 basis of the total cost was

subject to the mutual consent.

19. The sale conditions and terms were only for raising four floors on the

entire area of land, in the possession of Defendant No.1. There was no

Agreement between the parties in respect of three individual car parking

sites for three big cars on the Ground level that was to be sold by Defendant

No.1. However, Defendant No.2 got prepared an Agreement dated

13.04.2005 which does not reflect the real and true terms of the Agreement

between the parties. The Defendant No.1 came to know about these facts, at

a much later stage. At the time of execution of Agreement dated

13.04.2005, Defendant No.2 only made a payment of Rs.7 lakhs, out of

RSA 57/2018 Page 7 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 8]
which Rs.5.50 lakhs was paid in cash and Rs.1.50 lakhs was paid by way of

cheque. No subsequent payment ever was received in cash.

20. The Defendant No.1 started the work at site and in the whole process

of construction, Defendant No.2 illegally created another Agreement dated

01.07.2005. With intention to defeat the claims of recovery of Defendant

No.1 arising out of two Sale Deeds, executed in terms of Agreement dated

13.04.2005, Defendant No.2 first wanted the execution and registration of

Sale Deed with respect to the Upper Ground Floor of the property in

question and even got a Sale Deed dated 05.12.2005 prepared. When

Defendant No.1 insisted for payment in terms of the Agreement, Defendant

No.2 failed to make payment and under these circumstances, the registration

of Sale Deed dated 05.12.2005, was put on hold.

21. However, Defendant No.2 started exerting undue pressure on

Defendant No.1 and indulged in illegal Complaints and Notices. During this

period, Defendant No.2 was also in touch with Defendant No.1 and had been

assuring that the balance payment was being arranged and would be paid on

production of proposed Sale Deed for registration and handing over of

physical possession of the flats in question.

22. The Defendant No.1 thus, agreed to execute the Sale Deeds with

respect to First Floor and Second Floor and further agreed to rescind the

Agreement with respect to the Upper Ground Floor. Under the misleading

assurance of Defendant No.2, the Sale Deed was executed in favour of Smt.

Abhilash Jain and Smt. Kavita Jain on 12.07.2006 respectively, being

nominees of Defendant No.2 who got the Sale Deeds registered for First and

Second Floor respectively. The Defendant No.1 claimed that he had never

agreed to execute any Sale Deed with Parking, as the same was never in the

RSA 57/2018 Page 8 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 9]
terms of Agreement and there was over writing in this regard in the original

Sale Agreement.

23. It is submitted that after the execution of Sale Deeds in respect of

First and Second Floor, Defendant No.2 failed to clear the outstanding dues

of Rs.16,84,000/- with respect to First and Second Floor of the building,

having fraudulently got executed and registered the Sale Deeds. He kept on

deferring the payment of the balance amount on one pretext or the other.

Defendant No.2 was left with no right, title, interest in the Upper Ground

Floor of the property.

24. The Defendant No.1 accordingly issued Legal Notice dated

05.07.2007 to Defendant No.2 and his nominees demanding payment of the

balance amount, as well as seeking appropriate Undertaking as to no claim

and rights in the alleged Parking space on the Ground Floor. Defendant

No.2, however, failed to comply with the Legal Notice, but gave a false and

frivolous Reply.

25. Although, burden of all misc. expenses and for taking steps for

registration of Sale Deed on the purchaser, yet the Defendant No.2 failed to

discharge his obligation of paying the balance amount after execution and

registration of the Sale Deeds, in respect of First Floor and Second Floor of

the property in question.

26. Defendant No.2 filed a Suit No.123/2006 against Defendant No.1

and his family members, around September, 2006, before the District &

Sessions Court. The Defendant appeared in the said proceedings and filed

an Application under Section 8 Arbitration and Conciliation Act, which was

allowed vide Order dated 14.12.2006. The Suit was dismissed.

RSA 57/2018 Page 9 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 10]
27. Defendant No.2 filed RFA No.235/2007, but this Court vide Order

dated 09.09.2008, referred the parties to the Sole Arbitrator. The Defendant

No.1 filed his Counter-Claim for recovery of sum of Rs.16,84,000/-, as

being the balance amount of the agreed sale consideration of the First and

Second Floor flats; to declare those Sale Deeds executed in favour of

nominees of Defendant No.2 as not conferring any ownership in the Parking

space as incorporated in the Sale Deed dated 12.07.2007 and to declared the

Agreement dated 01.07.2005 as forged and fabricated document. The

Defendant No.1 also moved a separate Application for correction of

typographical error in the description of the date of Sale Deed, which was

mentioned as 12.07.2007 instead of 12.07.2006.

28. The representative of M/s Reliance Infratel Ltd. M/s Shruti Chandra

made a statement in the Court on 03.03.2009 informing that the Company

was no longer intending to install Telecommunication Tower on the roof top

of the property in question. She stated that the Company had abandoned the

site. Plaintiff No.1 Deshraj Saluja thereafter, filed an Application under

Order XXIII Rule 1 CPC withdrawing his Suit with liberty to file a separate

Suit as he had a distinct cause of action. The learned Trial Court permitted

Sh. Deshraj Saluja to withdraw the Suit with liberty to file a fresh one by

Order dated 27.11.2012.

29. The Suit was thus, continued only in the name of Sh. Arun Birla, the

Plaintiff/Appellant. Furthermore, the original Suit was amended to add an

additional prayer to seek Permanent Injunction for restraining Defendant

No.1, his employees etc. from causing hindrance/ obstruction in the use of

parking space of the Plaintiff and to refrain Defendant No.1 from using the

Parking space for his personal use.

RSA 57/2018 Page 10 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 11]
30. The Plaintiff in the Replication reaffirmed the assertions as made in

the Plaint and denied the allegations made in the Written Statement.

31. The Issues were framed on 18.04.2016, which are as under:-

1. Whether the plaintiff has no cause of action against the
defendant number one for filing the present suit? OPD

2. Whether in the present suit is not valued properly for the
purpose of court fees? OPD1

3. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree of mandatory
injunction against the defendant number one as prayed in
the clause (a)? OPP

4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree of mandatory
Injunction against the defendant number one as prayed
in the clause (B)? OPP

5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree of permanent
injunction against the defendant number one as prayed in
the clause (C)? OPP

6. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree of mandatory
injunction against the defendant number one as prayed in
the clause (d)? OPP
7. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree of permanent
injunction against the defendant number one as prayed in
the clause (e)? OPP

8. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree of permanent
Injunction against the defendant number one as prayed
in the clause (f)? OPP

9. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree of permanent
injunction against the defendant number one as prayed in
the clause (g)? OPP

10. Relief.

RSA 57/2018 Page 11 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 12]
32. The Plaintiff examined PW1 Bharat Sawaria, Record Keeper, from

office of Sub-Registrar, who produced the original sale deeds Ex. PW1/1 to

Ex. PW1/6.

33. The Plaintiff examined himself as PW-2 and tendered his evidence

by way of Affidavit, Ex.PW-2/A.

34. The Defendant No.2 did not lead any evidence.

35. The Defendant No. 1, Sh. Nirmal Singh, appeared as DW-1 and

tendered his evidence by way of Affidavit of evidence, Ex. DW-1/1.

36. The learned Civil Judge in the impugned Judgment dated 20.07.2017,

denied the relief for removal of encroachment/ construction from the

Parking space on the ground that the Plaintiff had nothing to do with Lower

Ground Floor, except the Parking space as indicated at Mark P3 in the Site

Plan. Likewise, the relief of removal of unauthorized construction carried

out by Defendant No.1 was denied, as there was no substantial evidence in

respect of the alleged unauthorized construction. Additionally, the relief for

restoration of the Guard Room and to remove the commercial use of the said

room was denied, on the ground of absence of evidence in this regard.

Moreover, the MCD had already sealed the Guard room and it was held that

no Order of Restoration as prayed by the Plaintiff, could be passed. This

relief was also declined.

37. However, the learned Civil Judge noted that in the Sale Deed dated

12.07.2008 Ex.PW1/6 vide which the Plaintiff Arun Birla had purchased the

suit property from the erstwhile owner Ms. Anita Lubana, clearly provided

that the Plaintiff was entitled to one Car parking space. It was also observed

that the Defendant No.1 in his cross-examination had admitted his signatures

RSA 57/2018 Page 12 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 13]
on the Sale Deed Ex.PW1/4, wherein it was recorded that the Second Floor

flat along with one individual car parking on the Ground Floor had been

transferred to Kavita Jain. DW1 had acknowledged the incorporation of

sale of Car Parking in the document Ex.DW1/4.

38. It was also the evidence of Plaintiff that Defendant No.1 was creating

hindrance/obstruction in the parking of the vehicle by the Plaintiff at Point 1.

Consequently, relying on the Sale deed of the Plaintiff Ex.PW1/2 to

Ex.PW1/6 it was held that the Plaintiff was entitled to the Car parking

space at Point P3 in the Lower Ground Floor. Consequently, the Suit of the

Plaintiff was decreed in respect of the Car parking and the Defendants were

restraint from creating any hindrance/ obstruction in the Parking space at

P3 of the Plaintiff

39. Aggrieved by the partial Decree of the Suit in respect of Car

parking in favour of the Plaintiff, the Defendant No.1 Nirmal Singh

filed RCA DJ No.71/2017 challenging the part Decree in favour of the

Respondent Arun Birla.

40. The learned District Judge in the impugned Judgment dated

11.12.2017, observed that there was an inter-se dispute between the

Defendant No.1 and 2 in respect of inclusion of Car Parking in the Sale

Deeds and also in their inter-se Agreement. It was also noted that in the

Sale Deed Ex.PW1/4 the words “individual parking on Ground Floor” was

written by hand which was a clear interpolation. When this Sale Deed itself

was under challenge, no reliance can be placed on this document and the

subsequent documents/Sale Deed executed to recognize the right of the

Plaintiff to any parking slot. It was observed that these photographs had

been filed only on 09.03.2016 while the Suit had been filed way back in

RSA 57/2018 Page 13 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 14]
2008. The photographs were held to be non-contemporaneous and the

Plaintiff could not derive any advantage from these photographs.

41. It was further noted that Defendant No.1 in his testimony had deposed

that he did not know what was written in the Written Statement or the

Affidavit, but his statements made in the cross-examination were ignored by

the learned Trial Court, when it concluded that Defendant No.1 had admitted

his signatures on the Sale Deed Ex.PW1/4. Furthermore, DW1 had

explained in his evidence that there is something over written at point C,

which was not a cutting but words written in hand referring to individual car

parking. Therefore, Sale Deed Ex.PW1/4 had formed the basis for

recognizes any right of the Plaintiff qua the parking space. The photographs

Ex.DW1/P4 and P5 were also referred to which show that when Plaintiff and

Deshraj Saluja had tried to park their cars to see whether their cars could be

parked in the said spaces, in consonance with the Mediation proceedings and

they had immediately thereafter removed the same, which could not have

been brushed aside by the Trial Court.

42. These events transpired subsequently when there was a mediated

settlement dated 11.11.2013, but it was not acted upon. There could not

have been a mention of this mediated Settlement in the pleadings, as it was a

subsequent event.

43. It was thus, concluded that the Plaintiff could not have claimed a

right to car parking in the Lower Ground Floor, on the basis of Sale Deed

Ex.PW1/4 when it was under a cloud and the issue of its authenticity and

credibility, was pending before the competent Court. Consequently, the

Appeal was allowed and the Suit of the Plaintiff decreed partly granting

relief of right to park the car in the Lower Ground Floor at Point 3 and

RSA 57/2018 Page 14 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 15]
restraining Defendant Noi.1 from creating any hindrance/obstruction in the

use of space, was set aside.

44. Aggrieved, the Plaintiff / Appellant, Arun Birla has filed the present

Regular Second Appeal under Section 100 read with Order XLII of

CPC, against the Judgment and Decree dated 11.12.2017 of the learned

District & Sessions Judge, dismissing the Suit.

45. The grounds of challenge are that the facts and the evidence, have

not been appreciated in the right perspective. It has not been considered that

there was no cutting in the Sale Deed executed between Arun Birla and

Kavita Jain and the words “individual car parking on Ground Floor” which

had been hand written in the Sale Deed, had been counter signed by

Defendant no.1 who had admitted in his cross-examination that Appellant

Arun Birla had nothing to do with the dispute between Defendant No.1 and

Defendant No.2 and also that Plaintiff was not even in the picture at the time

when the inter-se dispute between the Defendants arose.

46. There was no evidence led by Defendant no.1 to show that he had

never sold the car parking to the erstwhile respective owners, from whom

the property had been purchased by the Appellant. Furthermore, the

Defendant No.1 had admitted that his Counter-Claim “of not selling the car

parking to the erstwhile owner,” was rejected by learned Arbitrator in the

Arbitration Award. The Respondent No.1 had challenged the Award under

Section 34 Arbitration and Conciliation Act and has already availed the

remedy available to him under the law, which had been dismissed and the

Appeal preferred before this Court, had also been rejected. His subsequent

Suit for Declaration, was barred under law.

RSA 57/2018 Page 15 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 16]
47. Furthermore, the admission of Defendant No.1 in his cross-

examination that he had sold the parking area to the erstwhile respective

owners from whom the Appellant had purchased the property, has also not

been appreciated. The Defendant No.1 further admitted in his cross-

examination that he had converted the Guard Room, Kitchen and one Car

parking and had given them to the tenants, who were carrying on

commercial activity.

48. Mere pendency of the subsequent Civil Suit by Defendant No.1 ought

not have been the basis to conclude that the parking area had been

transferred. Furthermore, this Suit for Declaration was filed in the year

2016, only to create confusion and to obtain favourable orders. The

Appellate Court thus, erred in law by setting aside the Decree by relying

upon a subsequent Suit which is barred by limitation.

49. It is further submitted that the Sale Deed executed in favour of the

Appellant, was well within the knowledge of Defendant No.1 since the year

2008, a fact admitted by him in his cross-examination. The subsequent Civil

Suit filed by Defendant No.1 is hopelessly barred by limitation and also by

law.

50. The only fact for reversing the Judgment of the learned Civil Judge in

the Appeal was that the subsequent filing of Suit for Declaration, which

finding is perverse and the Plaintiff/Appellant could not have been non-

suited on this ground especially when the subsequent Suit for Declaration is

barred on the principle of res judicata and constructive res judicata.

Furthermore, the Defendant No.1 had never challenged the Sale Deed of the

Appellant from 2008 till 2015 and such objection cannot in any way stand in

the way of recognition of the right of the Appellant to the car parking.

RSA 57/2018 Page 16 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 17]
51. Furthermore, without any evidence, the learned District Judge has

come to the conclusion that the photographs of the Car of the Appellant

being parked in the dispute space, was taken at the time of Mediation. It has

not been considered that Defendant No.1 had never taken this stand that the

photographs pertains to the time of entering into the Mediation Settlement.

Moreover, the Defendant No.1 had admitted that Photograph Ex.DW1/P3

reflected the motor-cycle of the Appellant being parked in the Parking area

of the Ground Floor.

52. It is submitted that the findings by the Appellate Court which rest

essentially on the Suit for Declaration filed by Defendant No.1 in 2016, is

perverse and baseless and is liable to be set aside.

53. The proposed Substantial Question of Law in the Regular Second

Appeal are as under:

(1) Whether the Appellate Court was wrong in

relying upon the subsequent suit filed by the respondent

No.1, as the said suit was never become part of the

pleading before Ld. Trial Court?

(2) Whether the Appellate court was wrong in

relying upon the subsequent suit filed by the respondent

No.1, as the said suit is barred by law of limitation and

Appellate court ought not to have considered the said

subsequent suit?

(3) Whether the Appellate Court is wrong in coming

to the conclusion that the title of the appellant is under

cloud, irrespective of the fact that the title document has

been proved in a court of law as a credible document?

RSA 57/2018 Page 17 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 18]
(4) Whether the appellate court have overlook the

jurisdictional fact that the respondent No.1 never

challenged the sale deed of the appellant during the

pendency of the suit filed by the appellant and hence

subsequent suit filed by the respondent is barred under

order 2 Rule 2 CPC?

(5) Whether the Appellate court was wrong in

relying upon the subsequent suit filed by the respondent

No.1, as the said suit is barred by principle of Res-

Judicata and Constructive Res-Judicata?

(6) Whether the Appellate court can go into the

question and record its finding on the fact, when there

were no pleading in respect of it and during course of

trial, evidence was not led with the object of meeting such

plea?

(7) Whether the Appellate court had failed to

consider the valuable material on record and has failed

to discharge its judicial obligation having substantial

impact on the rights of the appellant?

54. It is, therefore, submitted that the impugned Judgment and Decree

dated 11.12.2017 of the Appellate Court may be set aside.

55. The Appellant in his written submissions has relied on the grounds as

stated in the Appeal.

56. The learned Counsel for the Respondent in the written submissions

has submitted that the First Appellate Court being the final Court of fact,

had done a comprehensive re-appreciation of the oral and documentary

RSA 57/2018 Page 18 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 19]
evidence and has set aside the findings of the learned Civil Judge on three

fundamental and inter-related aspects, which go to the root of the matter.

57. The first is the absence of possession, as the Plaintiff had failed to

establish lawful continuous and settled possession over any specifically

identifiable car parking space on the date of institution of the Suit. The

material including photographs were found to be insufficient and unreliable

to prove the possession at the relevant time.

58. The second ground is that there was a cloud over the title since the

claim of the Plaintiff was based on the recital in the Sale Deed which was

not free from cloud. The competency to convey exclusive rights in the

Lower Ground Floor area was seriously disputed thereby rendering the

claim of the Plaintiff legally uncertain and incapable of being accepted on

face value.

59. Thirdly, there was an active and bona fide challenge to the Plaintiff‟s

title which was not illusory or superficial, but was consistent and bona fide

challenge by the Defendant through counter-claim and independent

proceedings. On the cumulative consideration of the aforesaid aspects, the

First Appellate Court has rightly interfered and set aside the partial Decree

granted by the learned Trial Court.

60. It is further submitted that this being a Regular Second Appeal under

Section 100 CPC, the scope of consideration is confined to Substantial

Question of Law arising from the impugned Judgment. The findings of the

Appellate Court unless shown to be contrary to law or unsupported by

evidence, ordinarily do not want interference. The conclusions of the

Appellate Court are based on due appreciation of the evidence on record and

legal principles governing the grant of injunction.

RSA 57/2018 Page 19 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 20]
61. The Respondent has asserted that institution of a separate Declaratory

Suit by the Defendant, constitutes a legitimate exercise of substantive civil

rights and cannot be treated as a procedural impropriety. It is settled that

where a document relied upon by the Plaintiff creates a cloud over the rights

of another party, such party is entitled to receive affirmative relief by way of

Declaration in the independent proceedings. The mere fact that such

proceedings were initiated, does not disentitle the Defendant from contesting

the Plaintiff‟s entitlement to Injunction in the present Suit.

62. It has been further explained that in the Counter-Claim filed before

the Arbitrator in the year 2008 against Defendant No.2, the Respondent/

Defendant No.1 had specifically disputed the validity of the Sale Deed and

the alleged incorporation of Parking rights therein. The learned Arbitrator,

however, declined to adjudicate upon the said Counter-Claim on the ground

of lack of jurisdiction and no relief was granted in this regard.

63. It clearly demonstrates that the Respondent had consistently and

bona fide disputed the Plaintiff‟s alleged entitlement at every stage and the

inability to secure adjudication was only on account of jurisdictions

limitations and not on merits. The institution of independent proceedings,

thereafter, were thus a legitimate exercise of his legal rights and cannot be

construed as disentitling the Respondent to contest the present Suit.

64. It was further submitted that the Declaratory Suit filed by the

Defendant, was dismissed on account of deficiency of Court Fee which was

procedural in nature and was not an adjudication on the merits of the

challenge raised to the Plaintiff‟s claim. The Defendant/ Respondent being

a Senior Citizen suffers from multiple medical ailments and has limited

financial means and was unable to comply with the requirement of payment

RSA 57/2018 Page 20 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 21]
of additional Court Fee within time. Such dismissal, however, neither

invalidated the Plaintiff‟s alleged title nor precluded the Defendant from

continuing to dispute the legal efficacy and scope of the purported transfer

of exclusive parking rights.

65. The burden continues to be on the Plaintiff to establish a clear

enforceable entitlement as well as lawful possession on the date of

institution of the Suit. The Respondent has relied upon Balkrishna

Dattatraya Galande vs. Balkrishna Rambharose Gupta & Anr. Civil Appeal

No.1509 of 2019, wherein it is held that the Suit for Permanent Injunction

under Section 38 Specific Relief Act, the Plaintiff must establish actual and

physical possession over the Suit property as on the date of institution of the

Suit.

66. The Supreme Court in Ramji Rai vs. Jagdish Mallah (2007) 14 SCC

200 reiterated that possession as on the date of filing of the Suit, is a sine

qua non for grant of Decree of Permanent Injunction.

67. The Supreme Court in Anathula Sudhakar vs. P. Buch Reddy (2008) 4

SCC 594 has authoritatively laid down the general principle that a mere Suit

for Permanent Injunction is not maintainable in the circumstances when a

Declaratory relief or recovery of Possession is mandatorily required in the

facts of given case.

68. The mere filing of a Permanent Injunction when there exists a

substantial and genuine cloud on the right of the Plaintiff to seek Parking

rights exists, simpliciter Suit for Permanent Injunction was not maintainable.

69. Similar observations were made by the Supreme Court in S. Santhana

Lakshmi & Ors. vs. D. Rajammal, SLP (Civil) No.18943 of 2024 and

RSA 57/2018 Page 21 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 22]
reiterated by the Supreme Court in Jharkhand State Housing Board vs.

Didar Singh (2019) 17 SCC 692.

70. The learned Appellate Court has re-appreciated the evidence and has

correctly observed that the learned Trial Court had misdirected itself in

treating the inconclusive documentary recitals and post dispute photographs

as determined to prove of entitlement and possession. The findings are well

reasoned, evidence based and do not suffer from any perversity or

jurisdictional error.

71. The re-evaluation of pure findings of fact and substitution of

conclusions as sought by way of this present Regular Second Appeal is not

permissible and is not within the limited scope of interference in the Regular

Second Appeal. It is claimed that no substantial question of law survives for

consideration and the Appeal deserves to be set aside.

Submissions heard and record perused.

72. The Substantial Questions of Law were framed by this Court on

09.10.2018, as under:

(i) Whether the respondent/defendant No.1 was
entitled to, instead of in his defence to the suit of
the appellant/plaintiff taking a plea impugning the
documents on the basis of which the
appellant/plaintiff was claiming a right, file a
separate suit therefore and whether the
appellant/plaintiff could be deprived of the relief
in the suit merely for the reason of institution of
the other suit.
(ii) Whether the First Appellate Court was justified,
for the reasons given at internal page 17 of the
judgment, to interfere with the findings of fact of
the Suit Court.

RSA 57/2018 Page 22 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 23]
73. This Suit pertains to a dispute in regard to one car parking space on

the Lower Ground Floor of the Property in-question, which the Plaintiff, Sh.

Arun Birla, claimed to have purchased vide Sale Deed dated 11.07.2008. It

is not in dispute that the property in-question was owned by Defendant

No.1, Sh. Nirmal Singh, who entered into an Agreement with Defendant

No.2, Sh. Yashwant Jain, for demolition of the existing construction on the

said plot and for reconstruction of the entire Property from the Lower

Ground Floor till Third Floor.

74. Defendant No.1, Sh. Nirmal Singh and Defendant No.2, Sh.

Yashwant Jain, entered into an Advance Receipt-cum-Agreement to Sell and

Purchase dated 13.04.2005 Ex.DW-1/1, wherein the entire terms of

construction and the purchase of the floors were agreed and determined. In

the said Agreement, it was noted that Sh. Nirmal Singh had agreed as under:

“And whereas the First Party has further agreed to
sell, convey, transfer and assign to the Second Party / his
nominee and the Second Party / his nominee has agreed to
purchase the Upper Ground Floor, First Floor, Second
Floor portions, each consisting of furnished three Bed
Rooms, Drawing / Dining, Kitchen, Toilet-cum-bath along
with all fittings, fixtures & proportionate undivided, right to
use common entrance, passage, staircase, services &
facilities provided in the building and individual space for
three car paring on ground level & easement attached
thereto on the said property, with all easements, rights and
appurtenance attached thereto, (hereinafter referred to as
the said Property) unto the Second Party and the Second
Party has agreed to purchase the said property, for a total
sale consideration of Rs.69,00,000/- (Rupees Sixty Nine
Lacs Only).

RSA 57/2018 Page 23 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 24]
And WHEREAS upon the aforesaid assurance of this
First Party / First Party and the Second Party has agreed to
purchase the said property from the First Party, on the
following agreed terms and conditions of this Agreement.”

75. Defendant No.2, Sh. Yashwant Jain, invoked arbitration in respect of

this Agreement to Sell. Undeniably, Defendant No.1 Sh. Nirmal Singh,

executed the Sale Deed dated 12.07.2006 Ex.PW-1/4 in the name of Smt.

Kavita Jain, Nominee of Defendant No.2, in respect of Second Floor of the

Property in question. In this Agreement to Sell, while describing the Suit

Property, i.e. unfinished Flat on Second Floor, it was described that it

comprised of three Bed Rooms, Drawing / Dining, Kitchen, two Toilet-cum-

bath, Balcony with proportionate, undivided, indivisible rights in the land

underneath together with the right to use common entrance, passage,

staircase, submersible pump facility as provided in the building and the

easements attached thereto. The words ‘one individual big car parking on

the Lower Ground Floor’ was inserted with pen. The entire claim of

Defendant No.1 was that there was an interpolation in the Sale Deed

executed in favour of Ms. Kavita Jain, as he had never agreed to sell one big

car parking space on the Lower Ground Floor. He asserted that he was an

illiterate person and the Clause had been inserted fraudulently.

76. It is not in dispute that the construction of the property was carried out

in terms of Agreement to Sell, but thereafter, disputes arose between

Defendant Nos.1 and 2 and Defendant No.2 invoked the Arbitration, before

whom Defendant No.1 Sh. Nirmal Singh, filed a Counter-claim challenging

that there was no Agreement in respect of the three car parking, in the Lower

Ground Floor.

RSA 57/2018 Page 24 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 25]
77. The said Counter-claim of Defendant No.1 was dismissed by the

learned Arbitrator, and Defendant No.1 failed to succeed in his objections

under Section 34 of Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, and further in

the Appeal, preferred against the dismissal of the objections under Order

XXXIV CPC.

78. Not succeeding in the Arbitration proceedings, Defendant No.1 filed a

Suit for Declaration to claim that there was no Agreement of Selling the car

parking along with the three individual Floors. However, it has not been

denied that this Suit had been filed much in 2016, after the dismissal of the

Appeal to the Arbitration Award, to challenge the Agreement to Sell dated

13.04.2005. However, this Declaratory Suit has also been dismissed.

79. Defendant No.1 though asserted that he never agreed to sell a big car

parking space and there was an interpolation in the First Sale Deed executed

by him in favour of Ms. Kavita Jain, and that, being an illiterate person, he

been taken advantage of, however, as already noted above, all his

endeavours to challenge this Sale Deed, met with no success.

80. Furthermore, in the original Agreement to Sell dated 13.04.2005

Ex.DW-1/1 between Defendant Nos.1 and 2, it was specifically agreed that

the three Floors, i.e., 1st, 2nd and 3rd Floor, would have one big car

parking space each in the Lower Ground Floor. When this was the original

understanding and the Agreement between Defendant Nos.1 and 2, it was

wrongly asserted by Defendant No.1 that there was an interpolation in

regard to mentioning of the car parking in the Sale Deed executed by him in

favour of Ms. Kavita Jain / Nominee of Defendant No.2.

81. Learned Civil Judge had rightly appreciated the documents and

held that in fact, this Sale Deed in favour of Ms. Anita Lubana had been

RSA 57/2018 Page 25 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 26]
duly signed on each page by both Mr. Nirmal Singh as well as Ms. Anita

Lubana and only much later, he had tried to unsuccessfully challenge the

Sale Deed.

82. It is significant to observe that the property had been purchased by

Ms. Anita Lubana vide the Registered Sale Deed dated 27.06.2007 Ex.

PW1/5 from Ms. Kavita Jain and thereafter, by the Plaintiff Mr. Arun Birla

vide Sale Deed dated 11.07.2008 Ex.PW1/6. In the Sale Deed of Ms. Anita

Lubana and Mr. Arun Birla, it has been clearly typed in running in their

respective Sale Deed, that sale of the flat was along with one car parking in

the lower ground floor.

83. Therefore, learned Civil Judge has rightly held that the Plaintiff

was entitled to car parking space in the Lower Ground Floor.

84. However, the learned Appellate Court heavily relied upon the

challenge of Defendant No.1 to the Sale Deed before various forums and the

pendency of the challenge to the Sale Deed before the Court and also the

pendency of the Civil Suit. However, all ligation including Civil Suit have

been decided against Defendant No.1, thereby establishing Plaintiff‟s right

to have one car parking in the Lower Ground Floor.

85. In view of these findings and also the subsequent events, it is evident

that the findings of learned District Judge in the impugned Judgment were

patently perverse and there was no reason to interfere with the well-

reasoned Judgment of the learned Civil Judge or deny the car parking space

to the Plaintiff.

86. In light of the aforesaid discussions, impugned Judgment and decree

dated 11.12.2017 of the learned District and Sessions Judge is hereby, set

RSA 57/2018 Page 26 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA

[PAGE 27]
aside and the Judgement and Decree dated 20.07.2017 of learned Civil

Judge is restored.

87. Accordingly, the Appeal is allowed and disposed of, along with the

pending Applications.

NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA
JUDGE
AUGUST 04, 2026
RS/VA

RSA 57/2018 Page 27 of 27Signature Not Verified
DigitallySigned By:RITA