[PAGE 1]
THE ARMS RULES, 1962!
In exercise of the powers conferred by sections 5, 9, 10, II, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18,
21, 41 and 44 of the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959), the Central Government hereby
makes the following rules, namely:— :
1. Short title—(1) These rules may be called the Arms Rules, 1962.
(2) They shall come into force on the Ist October, 1962.
2. Interpretation.—in these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Act” means the Arms Act, 1959 (54 of 1959); |
(b) "appellate authority" means the appellate authority referred to in rule 5;
(c) "authority" or "officer" means, except where otherwise specifically provided
in these rules, the District Magistrate or such other Officer as may, from
time to time, be notified in the Official Gazette by the Central Government;
(d) “company” has the same meaning as that assigned to it in the Explanation
under section 33;
(e) "dealer" means a person who, by way of trade or business, manufacturers,
converts, repairs, proves, tests, sells, exports, imports, or transfers or
. keeps, for sale, repair or test arms or ammunition;
(f) “District Magistrate", includes—
2p)
(ii) in relation to any district or part thereof, an Additional District
Magistrate or any other officer specially empowered in this behalf
by the Government of the State concerned; |
(ili) in relation to a Union territory, any officer specially empowered by
the Central Government in this behalf;
‘(iv) in relation to the tribal areas of Assam, specified in Part B of the
Table appended to paragraph 29 of the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution, a Political Officer; and
‘I(v) in relation to the suburbs of Calcutta, as defined by notification issued
from time to time by the Government of West Bengal in their Official
Gazette under the Calcutta Suburban Police Act, 1866 (Bengal
Act Il of 1866), the Commissioner of Police, Calcutta, and a Deputy
Commissioner of Police, Calcutta, nominated by the State Government
in this behalf;]
(g) "Form" means a Form as set out in Schedule III; a
(h) "port" includes an airport;
(i) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to these rules;
1. Vide G.S.R. 987, dated 13th July, 1962, published in the Gazette of India, Pt. II, Sec. 3 (i), dated
28th July, 1962.
2. Clause (i) omitted by G.S.R. 947, dated 24th August, 1973 (w.e.f. 8-9-1973),
3. Subs. by 8.0. 1470, dated 23rd May, 1963. :

[PAGE 2]
The Arms Rules, 1962 27
(j) "section" means a section of the Act:

'((k) "Sub-divisional Magistrate" includes Additional Sub-divisional Magistrate,

: Sub-divisional Officer and Additional Sub-divisional Officer. ]

3. Classification of arms or ammunition.—For the purposes of the Act and these

rules, "arms" or “ammunition” shall be of the categories specified in columns 2 and

3 respectively of Schedule I and references to any category of arms or ammunition in
these rules shall be construed accordingly. :

| 4. Licensing authority and forms of licences——Licences under Chapter II of the

_ Act may be granted or renewed for such purposes, by such authorities, in such Forms
and to be valid for such period and in such areas as are specified in Schedule II,
subject to such conditions as are specified in that Schedule and in the licence:

? *[Provided that the licences granted or renewed by a licensing authority may be
signed by such officer subordinate to that authority as may be specially empowered in
this behalf by the State Government. ]

5. Appellate authorities.—(1) For the purposes of the Act and these rules the
appellate authority to whom an appeal shall lie from an order of the “[licensing or
other authority] specified in column (1) of the Table below shall be that specified in
the corresponding entry in column (2) thereof :
7 TABLE |
*[Authority] Appellate authority
| (1) | (2)
(a) Tehsildar; or Ist or 2nd Class District Magistrate.
gu Magistrate or *[Sub-divisional
rH, Magistrate].
4*{(b) Additional District Magistrate, Dis- *[(i)Commissioner of Division or in
trict Magistrate. Union territory, the Administrator
| thereof, or
(ii) In the States of °[ Tamil Nadu], Andhra
Pradesh and Kerala, the Board of
? . Revenue, or
(iii) In the States of Jammu and Kashmir
7***] West Bengal, Gujarat and
in any other State not being a State
mentioned in entry (11) above, in
which there is no post of Commissioner
_ ofa Division, the State Government. ]
(c) Commissioner of Police State Government.
(d) *[Commissioner of the Division The Administator]
in a Union Territory. 7"
(e) Head of Indian Mission, or Central Government
_.. Political Officer.
(f) Other specially empowered officer. Authority that empowered.
Siete finde ea ptsis e aietiepincgahcaesiret eepeihinie bales oti es Seabees head sin Se ha ciegetepat anh igi ena
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 1567, dated 20th August,. 1968.
2. Added by G.S.R. 1011 (A), dated 7th August, 1972.
3. Subs. by S.O. 1470, dated 23rd May, 1963.
4, Subs. by G.S.R. 1567, dated 20th August, 1968.
5. Subs. by G.S.R. 755, dated 11th May, 1964.
6. Subs. by G.S.R. 733, dated Ist July, 1974.
7. Omitted by G.S.R. 681 (E), dated 11th November, 1991. :
8. Subs. by G.S-R. 1377, dated 9th August, 1963.

[PAGE 3]
28 The Arms Rules, 1962

(2) For the purpose of sub-section (6) of section 17 of the Act the licensing authority
shall be deemed to be subordinate to the appellate authority.

6. Reasons to be communicated to the appellate authority in certain cases.—
Where a licensing authority is of opinion that it will not be in the public interest to
furnish reasons for the refusal, renewal, variation of conditions, revocation or suspension,
of a licence, to the applicant, the recorded reasons therefor and the facts of the case
shall be communicated by him to appellate authority.

7. Direction and control over licensing authorities—All licensing authorities
shall work under the direction and control of their respective appellate authorities.

8. Restriction in granting licences for acquisition, possessing or carrying of
arms or ammunition of category I.—(a) No licence shall be granted for acquisition,
possession or carrying of arms or ammunition of categories I (b), I (c) and I (d) unless
they have been lawfully imported into India or are being imported into India with the
sanction of the Central Government.

(b) A licence for acquisition, possessing or carrying of ammunition of categories
I (b) and I (c) shall be granted only if the licensing authority is satisfied that the
ammunition is to be sued with rifles or muskets which are lawfully possessed for
sporting purposes or with pistols or revolvers which have been lawfully imported into
India; and the amount of ammunition which the licensee may possess during each
period of 12 months immediately succeeding the date of grant of licence shall be
entered in the licence.

9. Copies of licence of categories I and If to be sent to certain authorities.—
A copy of every licence granted for arms or ammunition of categories I(a), I(b), I (c),
I (d) and II, shall forthwith be sent—

(a) to the District Magistrate of the place in which the arms or ammunition
are to be kept, or
(b) to the State Government if such place is in the State of Jammu and
’ Kashmir.

10. Possession of arms or ammunition for certain purposes to include use
thereof.—Possession of the following arms or ammunition for the purposes mentioned
against each includes use thereof, for such purposes only provided that such use does
not involve manufacture of any arms or ammunition (including explosive and fireworks):—

(a) arms, for theatrical performance, cinematograph production or signalling
for starting races or athletic meets;

(b) ingredients of ammunition, for bona fide industrial, agricultural or
medicinal purposes. 7“

ii. Restriction may be imposed by Central Government.—'[(1)] Any licence
having effect outside the State in which it is granted, shall be subject to any restrictions
which may be imposed by a general or special order of the Central Government.

i. Rule 11 re-numbered as sub-rule (1) thereof by G.S.R. 1259, dated 27th November, 1980.

[PAGE 4]
The Arms Rules, 1962 29

'((2) Save where he is specially authorised in this behalf by the District Magistrate
concerned, the licensee shall not carry any arms covered by the licence within the
campus or precincts of any educational institution.]

os Saga

13. Of retainer—{1) When the owner of any arms or ammunition licensed in
Form III applies for permitting his agent, relative or employee to possess or carry any
of the arms or ammunition covered by the licence for sport, protection or display, on
his behalf, whether in attendance only or not and in circumstances different from
those mentioned in the proviso to section 3, such agent, relative or employee may, if
the licensing authority considers it fit, be shown as a retainer by entering his name
and other particulars in column 6 of the owner’s licence in Form Ill.

(2) A licence in Form III granted to a company for the protection of its premises
or property shall be in the name of a member, agent or other representative of the
company, who shall be responsible for the custody of the weapon. The name of a
servant or any other employee entrusted with weapon for guarding the premises or
property of the company shall be entered as a retainer in the appropriate column of
the licence. The licensing authority shall issue to the licensee a permit in Form IIIB

| for each of such retainers shown in the licencee. The permit shall remain in the personal
custody of representative of the company and shall be made over to the retainers when
they are entrusted with the weapon covered by the licence: |

[Provided that the licensing authority shall obtain a report from the Police about
the antecedents of the retainer and take into consideration such report before admitting
him as retainer. ]

(3) A licence in Form IIIA for possessing and carrying of arms or ammunition
may be granted to a person nominated to be his retainer by a person exempted from -*
licensing requirements:

Provided that the retainer shall have no right, independent of the person so
exempted, to use the arms or ammunition covered by the licence, and the licence shall
cease to be in force on the day on which the person so exempted has ceased to be
an exemptee, or the retainer has ceased to be in the service of the exemptee:

{Provided further that the licensing authority shall obtain a report from the Police
about the antecedents of the retainer and take into consideration such report before
admitting him as a retainer.]

14. Licences for protection of crops and cattle—{1) Where a licence is granted
in Form V, any member of the family of the licensee or a servant employed by the
licensee to watch the crops or cattle and residing with him, may, in the discretion of
the licensing authority, be allowed to carry any of the arms or ammunition covered
by the licence to protect crops or cattle against wild animals in the area specified in

: the licence by entering his name and particulars in column 2 thereof.
|. Ins. by G.S.R. 1259, dated 27th November, 1980.

f 2. Rule 12 omitted by G.S.R. 1418, dated 15th September, 1965. “oh
; 3. Ins. by G.S.R. 703, dated 15th July, 1981.

[PAGE 5]
30 - The Arms Rules, 1962
(2) Where, after the end of any harvest season, the State Government considers |

it expedient that for the protection of wildlife in any area, any arms or ammunition |

licensed in Form V should be deposited in a police station or with a licensed dealer, .

it may, by order require any licensee to deposit such arms or ammunition for such

period as the arms or ammunition are not required for the protection of crops or cattle

and as may be specified therein, and thereupon the licensee should be bound to comply

with such order.

15. Licences for target practice.—Where a licence in Form VI has been granted |
in the name of any military mess, club or association it shall be lawful for any member
of such mess, club or association to use the fire-arms or ammunition covered by such
licence for the purpose of the mess, club or association in accordance with the conditions
of the licensee. |

16. Age limit for training and target practice.—Any person below the age of
sixteen years but not below the age of twelve years may be allowed to use a fire-arm
for the purposes of training in the use of such fire-arm in the immediate presence,
or under the direct supervision and guidance, of an adult instructor or the licensee:

Provided that no person below the age of sixteen years shall be allowed to carry
any fire-arm requiring a licence, in a public place, except in the immediate presence |
and supervision of the person who is lawfully entitled to carry such fire-arm.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule, an "adult" means a person who has
completed the age of twenty-one years.

17. Traveller’s (temporary) licence.—{1) Subject to the provisions of rule 8, a
licence in Form VII may be granted to any bona fide traveller, proceeding from the
place of his arrival in India to his place of destination in India, for the possession and
carrying of arms or ammunition for the duration of the journey, by the licensing authority
at the place of arrival.

. (2) A copy of every such licence shall be forthwith sent to the District Magistrate
having jurisdiction over the place of destination of the licensee; such authority shall
satisfy himself, when necessary, that the licensee has complied with condition 7 entered
on the Form of the licence.

18. Application of section 4 of the Act.—In any area ‘specified in the notification
issued by the Central Government under section 4, licence for acquisition, possession
or carrying in that area of arms of such class or description as may be specified in
that notification, may also be granted or renewed as provided in Schedule Hl, subject |
to such conditions as are specified in that Schedule and in the licence.

19. Arms other than fire-arms.—Unless the Central or State. Government by
notification in the Official Gazette so directs, no licence sha” be required for the
manufacture, sale, possession for sale, or test, of arms of category V except in the
areas notified under section 4.

20. Manufacture, conversion, shortening, repair, test, sale, etc., of arms or
ammunition.—(1) The licensing authority while granting a licence in Form IX shall
show clearly in the licence Form—

[PAGE 6]
The Arms Rules, 1962 31
(i) the categories and description of the arms or ammunition covered
by the licence;
(ii) the transactions permitted in respect of the different categories of
arms or ammunition, and
‘ omit any transactions or categories of arms or ammunition, not covered by the licence.

(2) A copy of every licence granted in Form IX by an authority other than the
District Magistrate of the place of business, factory or shop of the licensee shall forthwith
be sent to that District Magistrate.

21. Conversion, repair, test, sale, ete-—{1) Where a licence is granted in Form
iX or Form XI for conversion or repair, but not manufacture, of any category of firearms or ammunition, it entitles the licensee to fabricate components or parts, for the
purpose of conversion or repair of such fire-arms or ammunition but not to manufacture
such components or parts to be utilised for assembling into complete fire-arms or
ammunition of any category which he is allowed to manufacture.

(2) (a) A licence in Form XI shall not entitle the dealer to shorten a fire-arm or
to convert an imitation fire-arm, into a fire-arm, unless he has a licence in Form IA
showing specifically that he is permitted to shorten a fire-arm or convert an imitation
fire-arm into a fire-arm je

(b) Under no circumstances shall a dealer shorten the barrel of a rifle or smoothbore gun so that the resultant length becomes less than 20 inches.

(c) The details of the cases in which barrels are shortened and imitation fire-arms
are converted into fire-arms shall be reported every month to the District Magistrate,
in such form, if any, as may be required. -

(3) A dealer having a licence in Form XI, Form XII or Form XIII to Trepair
or test] or to sell fire-arms or ammunition shall not take the fire-arms or ammunition
for testing to a testing range or other place, unless specifically permitted to do so by
his licence, and he shall carry out tests only in such manner and subject to such
conditions as are laid down therein.

21(4) Where a licence is granted in Form [X or Form XI for conversion of
ammunition, it shall not entitle the licensee to convert blank cartridges or any
ammunitions having no projectile into single/multiple projectile ammunition or to load
or reload any ammunition. |

22. Proof-testing of fire-arms.—(1) Proof-testing of fire-arms manufactured by a
licensed dealer shall be carried out only in accordance with the regulations which may
be framed by the Central Government or framed by such authorities as the Central
Government may specify in this behalf and approved by that Government. 3

(2) No dealer shall sell a fire-arm which has not been duly proof-tested.

|. Subs. by G.S.R. 1689, dated 9th September, 1970. 3 |
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 703, dated 15th July, 1981. ‘

[PAGE 7]
32 The Arms Rules, 1962

23. Licensing authorities to furnish information to the District Magistrate.—
A copy of every licence granted in any Form by any authority other than a District
Magistrate shall be sent forthwith to the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over
the area in which the place of business or residence of the licensee is situated.

24. Sale or keeping for sale certain arms and ammunition.—(1) The State
Government or, in the States of '[Tamil Nadu], Andhra Pradesh or Kerala, the Board
of Revenue, may, by licence granted by it in Form XI or Form XII, authorise selected
dealers to sell or keep for sale a specified amount of ammunition of category | (c).

(2) A dealer possessing a licence in Form IX, Form XI, or Form XII shall not
sell or transfer any arms or ammunition of category I (b) or | (c) to any person, unless
the acquisition or possession of such arms or ammunition is expressly permitted in his |
licence or in his certificate of exemption.

25. Identification marks on fire-arms.—({!) A manufacturer of fire-arms shall
get every fire-arm manufactured by him stamped so as to show distinctly—

(a) the maker’s name and registered trade mark, if any; :
(b) the serial number of the weapon as entered in his register and the year
of stamping; and
(c) proof-mark;
as shown in the following Table:—
*TTABLE
Weapons Manufacturer's Serial Number Proof-mark
name (Register No.)
l 2 3 4
1. DBBL (i) On the rib at the (i) On the fastner (i) On the flats of the
Weapons top near the (ii) On the flats of barrels
breech barrel (ii) On the side of the
(ii) On the side of (iii) On the flats of action body
the action body the action body
2. SBBL (i) On the barrel (i) On the fastner (i) On the flat of the
Weapons near the breech (ii) On the flat: of | barrel
(ii) On the side of the barrel (ji) On the side of the
the action body (iii) On the flat of action body
the action body
3: ML (i) On the barrel or (i) On the barrel (i) On the barrel
Weapons on the rib near near the nozzle
| the nozzle “
(ji) On the side (ii) On the action a
plates body
4. Revolvers On the barrel (i) On the barrel (i) On the barre!
(ii) On chamber (ii) On the body
(iii) On the body (iii) On the cylinder
5. Pistols On the frame On the frame (i) On the barrel
(ii) On the body
|. Subs. by G.S.R. 733, dated Ist July, 1974.
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 165, dated 11th February, 1988.

[PAGE 8]
The Arms Rules, 1962 33
(2) When an imported fire-arm kept for sale by a dealer does not bear the
manufacturer’s name, such distinguishing mark of the importer as allotted by the State
Government shall be engraved on the barrel (adjacent to the number, if any, existing
thereon) and on other parts as shown in column (2) of the Table under sub-rule (1);
if a barrel bears more than one number, the distinguishing mark shall be affixed to
the number appearing on the original invoice. When the manufacturer’s number appear
only on the trigger guard or other replaceable part, that number shall be engraved on
the parts shown in column (3) of the Table.

(3) A person, who has in his possession any fire-arm which does not bear distinctly
a manufacturer’s name, number of other identification mark as mentioned in sub-rule
(1), shall get the identification mark stamped on the fire-arm consisting of—

(a) such distinct letters as may be prescribed for the purpose by the State
Government;

(b) serial number of the possession licence in the Arms Register of the
licensing authority concerned or, in respect of the fire-arms in possession
of a person exempt from the obligation to take out licence for their
possession, the letters ‘Ex’: and

(c) the year of stamping, 3

in that order and in the following manner:—
|. Rifles —On the barrel and breech.
2 Guns and Pistols —On the barrel.

3. Revolvers —On the breech and cylinder.

26. Records of transactions in arms and ammunition.—(1) Every dealer shall
maintain such registers as may be prescribed by the Central Government to show :
receipts, disposals, balance of stock in hand and daily sales of arms or ammunition ”
of different categories and provide such other information as may be required,

(2) Every entry of transactions in such registers shall be made before the close
of business hours on the same day and in the case of a sale or transfer the dealer

| shall, at the time of the transaction, require the purchaser or transferee, if not known
to him, to furnish particulars sufficient for identification, and shall immediately enter
the said particulars in the registers.

27. Inspection of premises, stock and record.—Every Magistrate and policeofficer not below the rank of Inspector, or if the Central Government so directs, of
Sub-Inspector, '[acting within the local limits of his authority, or any officer of the
Central Government specially empowered in this behalf may]—

(a) enter and inspect the premises in which arms or ammunition are
manufactured or in which arms or ammunition are kept by a manufacturer
or dealer in such arms or ammunition; and

(b) examine the stock and accounts of receipts and disposals of arms and
ammunition or any other register or document.

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 3, dated 28th December, 1967.

[PAGE 9]
34 The Arms Rules, 1962

28. Restrictions upon import or export for re-import of arms or ammunition.—
A licence shall not be granted for the import or export for re-import of any arms or
ammunition through the medium of post office.

29. Import by sea or air.—Arms or ammunition shall be deemed to have been
brought into India by a person when such arms or ammunition are imported though

. an agent and are either—
(1) consigned to such person direct, or
(ii) consigned to the said agent, if the agent possess, a certificate from the
said person that the arms or ammunition are bona fide his property and
the agent only clears the arms or ammunition from the customs house
and forwards the same.

30. Vessels entering the territorial waters of India.—Arms or ammunition carried
by a vessel entering the territorial waters of India or leaving such waters. shall be
deemed to be imported or exported as the case may be, Irrespective of whether the
vessel carrying the arms or ammunition does not berth.

31, Import by land or river of arms and ammuniton.—( |) Where a licence is
granted in Form XVI and the articles are consigned to an arca not on the [rontier o}
India, a copy of the licence shall forthwith be sent by the authority granting it to the
Government of the State concerned or the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over
the area in which they cross such frontier: and the State Government/District Magistrate
may in its/his discretion require the licensee to produce the arms or ammunition for
iis/his inspection before allowing the same to be taken out.

(2) Where arms or ammunition are imported by rail. a copy of the licence shall
forthwith be sent by the authority granting it to the railway authorities at the place
to which such arms or ammunition are consigned.

32. Bringing of arms or ammunition into India by bona fide tourists.—'|(1)

, A licence, valid for a period of six months from the date of the endorsement referred
to in sub-rule (1A), may be granted in Form II to bona. fide tourists referred to in
clause (b) of the provisio to sub-section (1) of section: 10, so far as practicable, six
months prior to the expected date of arrival of the tourist in India:

Provided that the validity of the licence so granted''shall commence only from the
date of endorsement of the said licence and that the arms and ammunition covered
by the licence shall not be used till the date of endorsement of the licence.

(1A) When a licence is granted in Form I to a bona fide tourist, under sub-rule
(1), the licence, together with the passport/visa of the tourist, shall be presented to the
licensing authorily as soon as may be after the disembarkment of the tourist and the
latter shal]— ia

(a) after obtaining the undertaking referred to in sub-rule (2), endorse the
licence making it valid for a period of six months from the date of the
endorsement: and

(b) make an entry in the passport/visa giving full particulars of all the arms
and ammunition for which the licence has been granted.]

|. Subs. by G.S.R. 1019, dated 22nd May, 1968.

[PAGE 10]
The Arms Rules, 1962 35
(2) The licensing authority shall obtain an undertaking in writing from the licensee
that he shall not sell or transfer the arms or ammunition to any one in India without
the prior permission of the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the place where
such sale or transfer is to be made, and where the arms or ammunition are sold or
transferred he shall inform the customs authority and pay the duty, if any.
(3) The passport checking authority or any other officer empowered by the District
Magistrate in this behalf at the port or other place of departure from India shall verify
that the arms entered in the passport/visa are being taken out of India by the licensee
and recover the licence and forward the same to the authority who issued it with the
remarks that the arms have been duly re-exported or lawfully sold or transferred in
India, as the case may be,
33. Of exports.—(1) The authority granting a licence in Form XVII for export
by sea or air of arms or ammunition from customs ports to ports in foreign territory
or Commonwealth shall send a copy of such licence to the agent or master of the
vessel or to the air carrier by which the arms or ammunition covered by the licence
are intended to taken out of India. i
(2) The weapons of the following description shall not be allowed to be exported
namely:— ue |
. (i) weapons falling within the definition of "antiquity" under the Antiquities
(Export Control) Act, 1947 (31 of 1947)*;
(11) weapons of current and popular bores for which ammunition is available
in the country; and
(iii) automatic weapons and weapons which are in use by the police or the
armed forces of the Union. ad
(3) Every application for the grant of a licence in Form XVII or Form XVIII for
export of fire-arms shall be accompanied by a certificate from the Director-General of
Archaeology of the Central Government to the effect that the arms intended to be
exported do not fall within the definition of "antiquity" under the Antiquities (Export
Control) Act, 1947 (31 of 1947)*. If the application is made to the Central Government,
it shall be accompanied by a further certificate from the licensing authority of the
place from where the weapons are intended to be exported certifying that the weapons
do not belong to any of descriptions mentioned in sub-rule (2).
34. Export by land or river of arms and ammunition.—When a licence for
export of arms or ammunition by land or river is granted in Form XVIII a copy of
the licence shall forthwith be sent by the licensing authority—
(a) where the arms or ammunition are exported by rail, to the District 3
Magistrate of the place from which the consignment is to be despatchéd
or, in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, to the State Government, and |
such authority shall forthwith send a copy to the railway authorities at |
the station from which the consignment is to be despatched; :
*. See now the Antiquities and Treasures Act, 1972 (52 of 1972). :

[PAGE 11]
36 The Arms Rules, 1962
(b) where the arms or ammunition are exported by road or river, to the District
Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area out of which they are to
cross the frontier of India; and such Magistrate may, in his discretion,
require the licensee to produce the arms or ammunition for his inspection

before allowing them to leave the area. |
| 35. Export and re-import of arms and ammunition by sea or air.—{1) A
licence in Form XIX may be granted for export of arms or ammunition by sea or air

from one place in India and re-import into another place in India—
(a) by the Central Government or any other officer specially empowered by
it, if—

(i) the arms or ammunition are taken by sea or by an International Air
Service or across intervening territory not forming part of India, or
(ii) the arms or ammunition form part of the estate of a deceased or
insane person who was or is subject to the Indian Navy Act, 1957
(62 of 1957), or whose estate is dealt with under the Army and Air
Force (Disposal of Private Property) Act, 1950 (4 of 1950), where
such arms or ammunition are to be sent to the wife, widow, legal
representative or next-of-kin of such deceased or insane person; or

(b) by the licensing authority—

(1) for import, at the place of destination, or
(ii) for export, at the place of despatch subject to the previous consent
of the licensing authority at the place of destination as required under
rule SO,
if the arms or ammunition are carried by sea or by an internal air service.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this rule, "India" includes any of ex-French
settlements in India.

(2) A copy of every licence granted under sub-rule (1) shall forthwith be sent by
the authority granting it to—

(a) the licensing authority/authorities of the place of despatch/destination of
the articles as the case may be; or if the place of despatch/destination is
in any of the ex-French settlements in India, to the Secretary, General
Administration Department, Government of Pondicherry; and

(b) where the place of despatch/destination of the articles is other than a
port—

(1) to the licensing authority at the port of export/re-import; and
(it) if the route includes transport by rail, to the railWay authorities at
the station from which the consignment is to be despatched.

36. Arms or ammunition to be delivered to Commissioner of Customs in certain
cases.—Where a vessel or aircraft bound for a port other than a port in India calls
at any port in India in the course of its voyage, and remains there for a periods 7
exceeding forty-eight hours, any arms or ammunition in the possession of any passenger

[PAGE 12]
The Arms Rules, 1962 37
not exempted from liability to take out a licence in respect of such possession shall
be delivered by him to the Commissioner of Customs to be detained until the departure
by sea or air, as the case may be, of such passenger, and it shall not be necessary for
such passenger to take out any licence in respect of the arms or ammunition so delivered
and detained.

37, Prohibition of transport of arms and ammunition.—(1) Save as herein
otherwise provided, no person shall transport over India or any part thereof any firearms or ammunition or any arms of category V, except under and in accordance with
the conditions of a licence granted under these rules.

(2) Nothing in sub-rule (1) or in section 12 shall be deemed to apply to arms or
ammunition—

(a) transported personally or as personal luggage, in reasonable quantities for
his own use, by a person lawfully entitled to possess or carry such arms
or ammunition;

(b) transported by a person licensed to manufacture such articles, for proof
testing, in a case or package legibly addressed to a Government:
establishment or an establishment approved in this behalf by the Central
Government, or re-transported by such establishment to such person:

(c) of category V, transported through an area where the Central Government
has, by notification in the Official Gazette, applied section 4,or from
such area where section 4 does not apply, provided that the weapons are
properly packed and labelled,showing clearly the description of these
articles and the name and address of the consignee:

(d) transported by a licensed dealer for export or after Import, in accordance
with a licence for their export or import— -
(i) from the place of despatch to the port or other place of export, or

(ii) from the port of other place of import to the place of destination, or

(iii) by transhipment in the port of import for re-export by sea or air:
(e) transported—

(i) by a person lawfully entitled to possess such articles, in reasonable
quantities for his own use from the premises of a licensed dealer,
or for purposes of examination or repair or test to or from any such
premises, or to the address of any other person lawfully entitled to
possess such articles; or

(ii) by a licensed dealer in a case or package legibly addressed to a person |
lawfully entitled to possess such articles, in compliance with an order
given by such person for the supply of such articles, in reasonable
quantities, for his own use or carrying out necessary repairs thereto;

(f) being chlorates, transported for bona fide industrial, agricultural or medical
purposes:

[PAGE 13]
38 The Arms Rules, 1962

Provided that—

(i) transport of arms or ammunition under clause (d), clause (e) or clause (f)
shall be subject to obtaining a certificate of no objection from the licensing
authority at the destination of the articles as provided for in rule 50;

(ii) transport of arms or ammunition personally for any of the purposes stated
in sub-clause (1) of clause (e) without using them through any area outside

| the area of validity of his possession licence, shall be subject to his
obtaining a permit from the licensing authority at the starting place of
transport; and
(iil) prior intimation of the transport of arms of category V under clause (c)
or of chlorates under clause (f) shall be given to the officer-in-charge of
the nearest police-station or a Magistrate having jurisdiction over the place
of despatch.

(3) The officer or Magistrate receiving prior intimation under clause (iii) of the
proviso to sub-rule (2) shall immediately inform the District Magistrate and, if the
articles are transported by rail, the superintendent of railway police having jurisdiction—

(i) over the place of destination in the case of transport of chlorate, and

(ii) over the place of entry into the area where section 4 applies, in the case
of transport of arms of category V.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this rule, ‘transport’ includes movement or arms
or ammunition across any part of the country, but does not include movement of arms
or ammunition by a licensed dealer from a warehouse, godown or any other similar
place to his factory, shop or other places of business within the same village, town
or city.

38. Transport of arms or ammunition—{1) A copy of licence granted in Form
XX for transport of arms or ammunition beyond the local limits of the jurisdiction ofthe authority granting it shall forthwith be sent to the District Magistrate having

‘ jurisdiction over the area where the place to which the articles are consigned is situated,
or if such place is in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, to the Government of the
State. .

(2) A copy of every such licence granted by a District Magistrate for transport
within the limits of his jurisdiction shall forthwith be sent to the Subordinate Magistrate
(if any) having jurisdiction over the place to which the arms or ammunition are
consigned,

(3) Where arms or ammunition are transported by rail, a copy of such licence or
a copy of the no objection certificate referred to in rule 50 shall be attached to the
way-bill or invoice, as the case may be, and telegraphic advice of every such |
consignment shall be sent by the railway authorities from the forwarding to the receiving :
station.

(4) A licence of the transport of arms or ammunition shal! not, save for special!
reasons to be recorded by the authority granting it, be granted for a period longer than
twice the time likely to be occupied in the journey to the place of destination by the
route indicated in the licence:

[PAGE 14]
The Arms Rules, 1962 39

Provided that the licence for a longer period, not exceeding a quarter of a year
at one time, may be granted in connection with industrial purposes for transporting
ingredients of munition in instalments from the godown to the factory of the licensee
situated within the same district but not in the same locality. A licensee transporting
any ingredients of ammunition under such licence shall give prior ammunition to the
nearest Magistrate/officer-incharge of the police station: and he shall make necessary
entries promptly in stock registers maintained for the purpose at both godown and the
factory.

39, Licence for import, transport and re-export of arms and ammunition. Where
under the authority of a licence for import, transport and re-export of arms or ammunition
granted in Form XIX, the arms or ammunition are to be—

(a) transported across Indian territory entirely by rail, a copy of the licence shall
forthwith be sent by the authority granting it, to the licensing authority and
to the railway authority at the places from which the consignment is to be

| despatched;

(b) transported across Indian territory and re-exported by land or river, a copy.
of the licence shall forthwith be sent by the authority granting it to the
District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area out of which the
consignment is to cross the frontier of India.

40. Scrutiny by authorities of consignments containing arms and ammunition.—
(1) (a) (3) Where a package or case containing arms or ammunition is brought for
export or transport, to a railway authority or shipping agent or a master of vessel or air
carrier, the latter shall, before receiving the articles for despatch or despatching them,
verify that they are accompanied by the original licence in the case of export or an attested
copy of the licence in the case of transport or of export for re-import.

(ii) Where a consignment is received after import, or transport, by an authority ata = e+
port checking import or by a railway authority, such authority shall require the production
of the original licence before delivering the consignment,

(b) Where arms or ammunition consigned to an area not on the frontier of India are
imported, or where a consignment of arms or ammunition is exported, by land or river, the
District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area in India, into or out of which it crosses
the frontier of India or an officer appointed by him in this behalf shall require the licensee
to produce original licence and may, in his discretion. require the licence ot produce the
arms Or ammunition for his inspection before allowing the articles to leave the area.

(c) The aforesaid authority shall satisfy himself—

(i) that the licence accompanying the consignment or produce by the licensee

is identical in substance with the copy sent to him: and
(i) that the arms or ammunition correspond with the description given in
such licence.

(2) Where in any case referred to in sub-rule {1}—

(a) the original licence is not produced by the consignee or the original or
attested copy of the licence does not accompany the case or package, as
the case may be, or ~

[PAGE 15]
40 The Arms Rules, 1962

(b) the licence is not identical in substance with the copy sent to the authority,
or

(c) the arms or ammunition do no correspond with the description given in
such licence,

the authority shall not receive the articles for despatch or allow the articles to proceed
further or deliver the consignment, as the case may be, and shall, in case he is not
a Magistrate, forthwith inform the nearest Magistrate.

41. Production and delivery of licence or import/export/transport—{1) The
consignee of arms or ammunition imported/transported under a licence or his agent
in the case of arms or ammunition exported under a licence shall—

(a) produce the licence, where the consignment in the course of import crosses
the frontiers of India by land or river, within six days of such crossing,
before the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area into which
the consignment so crosses or before such other officer as the District
Magistrate may appoint in that behalf;

(6b) deliver that licence within six days of the arrival of the consignment—
(i) at the destination, in the case of such consignment has been imported

or transported to a place in India, or
(ii) in the area of which such consignment, being exported/transported
across Indian territory for re-export, is to cross the frontier of India
and before it so crosses,
to the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area in which the destination
or place of crossing as the case may be, is situated, or such other officer as the
District Magistrate/State Government may appoint in that behalf.

(2) Every officer, to whom a licence is produced or delivered under sub-rule (1),
shall satisfy himself that—

(a) the arms or ammunition correspond with the description given in the
licence, and
(b) any deficiency is properly accounted for.

(3) If the officer to whom a licence is delivered under sub-rule (1) is an officer
other than the District Magistrate, the licence shall be forwarded by such other officer
to the District Magistrate.

42. Import, transport and export of arms and ammunition for the Government
of Nepal or the King of Nepal.—{1) Where arms or ammunition are imported into
India for despatch to the Government of Nepal or His Majesty the King of Nepal, the
customs authorities at the port of disembarkation, or the licensing-authority in other
places, shall check the consignment against the list of arms or ammunition received
from the Central Government; the package shall be sealed thereafter in the presence
of a Customs Examiner or any other authority appointed for the purpose by the Central
Government.

[PAGE 16]
|
|
The Arms Rules, 1962 44
(2) (a) Where arms or ammunition imported into, or acquired in India are to be
despatched to Nepal for the Government of Nepal, or His Majesty the King of Nepal,
_ they shall be accompanied by a certificate from the Commissioner of Customs or the
licensing authority of the area concerned to that effect; the certificate shall also contain
a description of the marks on each package or case sufficient to enable it to be readily
identified and a general statement of the contents of such package or case.

(b) On receipt of requisition from the clearing agents or the firm concerned, as the
case may be, the District Magistrate shall arrange for necessary escort up to the railway
station.

(c) The railway authorities shall not receive for despatch any package or case
containing arms or ammunition unless accompanied by a certificate as required under
clause (a).

(3) Where in any case—

(1) the list referred to in sub-rule (1) is received from the Central Government,
or | .

(11) the arms or ammunition imported into, or intended to be despatched from -

India do not correspond with the description given in such list.
the authorities concerned shall not allow the consignment to be despatched to Nepal and
shall forthwith inform the Central Government.

43. Transport of arms from any place in Nepal to any other place in Nepal through
Indian) territory.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in rules 8 and 28. the
Asabaseadlot of India’ in Nepal, on application made by or on behalf of His Majesty the
King of Nepal, of the Government of Nepal and subject to confirmation by the Central
Government, may grant a licence in Form XXI for the import into, possession in, transport 2across, or export out of, India from any place in the territory of Nepal to any other place
in that territory across the frontiers of India, of arms or ammunition of categories I and
il or any other category, by His Majesty the King of Nepal, personal accompanying him.
his brothers, the Prime Minister of Nepal and Nepal Government’s Troops or Police, as
the case may be.

(2) Where under the authority of a licence granted under sub-rule (1), arms or
ammunition are to pass across Indian territory— |

(a) if entirely by rail, a copy of the licence shall forthwith be sent by the
Ambassador to the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the areas
through which the arms or ammunition shall pass across the frontiers of
India and also to the railway authorities of the place in Indian territory
through which the consignment shall pass:

(b) if by road or river, a copy of the licence shall forthwith be sent to the
District Magistrates having jurisdiction over the areas through which the
arms Or ammunition shall pass across the frontiers of India.

(3) The Central Government, or the Ambassador with the approval of the Central
Government may make any order regulating the safe transit to Nepal across the frontiers
of India of the arms or ammunition mentioned in this rule.

[PAGE 17]
4? The Arms Rules, 1962

44, Transit licences for bona fide travellers.—(1) Where a licence is granted in Form
XXII, the licensing authority shall endorse the passport/visa of the tourist to that effect.

(2) A copy of every licence granted in Form XXII shall forthwith be sent to such
officer of the Government of the State in which the place of his departure from India
is situated as may be specially empowered in this behalf by the State Government or
the Administrator or Lieutenant-Governor or Chief Commissioner of Union territory,
as the case may be.

(3) (a) The licensee shall not, while in India, sell or transfer any arms or
ammunition covered by his licence without prior permission of the licensing authority
of the place where such sale or transfer is to be effected. He shall produce the arms
or ammunition or the permission of the licensing authority, as the case may be, at the
time of leaving India and return his licence to the passport checking authority, or
other authority empowered by the District Magistrate in this behalf, at the port or
other place of departure from India;

(b) The passport checking authority or other authority to whom the licence is
returned by the licensee, shall forward the same to the authority who issued it, with
the remarks that the arms or ammunition have been duly exported, or sold or transferred
with the permission of the authority concerned as required under clause (a).

45. Licensee to keep in custody arms and ammunition.—The licensee in Form
XIV shall not accept for custody arms or ammunition without satisfying himself that
there is no mala fide intention on the part of the depositor or any person on whose
behalf the deposit is being made. The dealer shall either inform the nearest police station
and the District Magistrate personally, or despatch information to the officer-in-charge of
the police station and the District Magistrate by registered post on the day of deposit
or return or disposal, as the case may be, of such arms or ammunition.

46. Deposit of arms and ammunition under section 21.—({1) When a licensing authority
decides to suspend or revoke a licence or to refuse to renew it he shall while communicating

| his decision in writing to the licensee, inform him that—

(a) under section 21(1) he is required to deposit within such time as may be
specified in the order suspending, revoking or refusing to renew the licence,
the arms or ammunition covered by thé licence, either with the officerin-charge of the nearest police station or with a dealer holding a licence in
Form XIV, or in case he is a member of the armed forces of the Union, in
the unit armoury;

(b) subject to the proviso to section 21(2), during the period prescribed under
sub-rule (4), he or, in the case of his death, his legal. representative is
entitled to sell or otherwise dispose of the arms” or ammunition to any
person lawfully entitled to possess the same and to receive the sale
proceeds, if any; and

(c) if the arms or ammunition have not been disposed of or their possession
by the licensee or his legal representative, as the case may be, has not
become lawful within the prescribed period they shall, subject to the
proviso to section 21(3), be forfeited to Government by order of the District
Magistrate.

[PAGE 18]
The Arms Rules, 1962 43
(2) Where any arm or ammunition is deposited by an owner under section 21(1), in
a police station or unit armoury, or with a dealer holding a licence in Form XIV, the officerin-charge of police station or unit armoury or the licensed dealer, as the case may be,
shall—
(a) attach to each article deposited, a card showing the following:—
Deposit under section 21(1)—
(i) Description (No. etc.) of the article ssiscbsawaahaassctaawedbosselbes
(ii) Particulars of licence of exemption (if any) actupasatavennsenieecepeeeas
(ii) Name and address of depositor SNaaSSARSENE CUT Nexedespeoen nnn
(iv) Serial No. in register and date of deposit A
(v) Date due for forfeiture/disposal ee
Signature of depositor,
Signature of dealer/or officer-in-charge
of police station/unit armoury.

(b) issue to the depositor a receipt containing the same details as in (a); and

(c) immediately send a copy of the receipt of the authority who granted the
licence or renewed it last. Ncowelt

(3)(a)(i) Any arms or ammunition deposited in a unit armoury under section 21(1)
may, unless returned or disposed of earlier, be transferred, after the expiry of a period
of 30 days after such deposit to the nearest police station.

(ii) any arms or ammunition deposited in a police station under section 21(1) which
have not been returned or disposed of within 30 days of the deposit and the arms or .ammunition transferred under clause (i) may be transferred for sake of better maintenance
or safety to a police armoury in the district/taluqua headquarters or such other place as
may be specified by the District Magistrate, in accordance with such instructions as may
be issued by the State Government for the purpose:

Provided that the District Magistrate may, when he considers it desirable. extend the
said period of 30 days.

(b) Intimation of such transfer shall be given to the depositor of the article and to
the licensing authority who granted or last renewed the licence for the article.

(4) The period within which a depositor or his legal representative may exercise his
rights under sub-section (2) of section 21 shall be—

(a) six months from the date of deposit, if the arms or ammunition are deposited
as a Consequence or contravention by its, owner of any provision of the Act
or these rules or any condition of the licence:

(b) one year—

(i) from the date of deposit, if the arms or ammunition are deposited as a
consequence of its possess on becoming unlawful under section 21( 1)
otherwise than as under clause (a); or

[PAGE 19]
Ad The Arms Rules, 1962

(il) it is already in deposit, from the date of communication to the owner,
of the order revoking, suspending, or refusing to renew the licence,
or

(ii) from the date of notification issued under section 4:

Provided that any period under clause (a) or (b) shall be reckoned—

(i) where an appeal is preferred by the owner under section 18 from the
date of the final order of the appellate authority;

(ii) where the arms or ammunition is the subject of a legal suit or dispute
or is owned or inherited by a person who has not completed the age
of sixteen years—from the date of termination of the dispute or of
completion by that person of the age of sixteen years; and

(111) Where the owner of the arms or ammunition is on active service outside
India—from the date of his return to India:

‘[Provided further that—

(i) when the arms and ammunition is owned by a person who is
considered by the licensing authority to be unfit, for the time being
to carry the arms or ammunition for any reason, or in any other
suitable case, the District Magistrate or the Commissioner of Police.
in relation to any metropolitan area, may extend the period prescribed
under clause (a) or clause (b) for a period upto six months; and |

(ii) the State Government may by special or general order extend the
period beyond six months:]

'[Provided further that when the arms or ammunition is owned by a person who
is considered by the licensing authority to be unfit, for the time being, to carry the
arms or ammunition for any reason, the period prescribed under clause (a) may be
extended suitably by the District Magistrate, or the Commissioner of Police in relation

- to any metropolitan area.]

*[(c) *[two years] if the fire-arms are deposited as consequence of proviso to subsection (2) of section 3.]

(5) (a) Any arms or ammunition not returned or disposed of before the expiry of
the period prescribed under sub-rule (4) shall be notified to the District Magistrate:
and subject to the provisos of sub-rule (4) and the proviso to the section 21(3) transferred
to the district malkhana or such other places as required by order of the District Magistrate,
for the purpose of forfeiture under section 21(3).

(b) The District Magistrate shall, before making an order of forfeiture after the expiry
of the prescribed period serve a notice as required under section 21/4) in'the like manner
as for service of summons under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898)’:

Provided that, in the case of the depositor being a member of the armed forces of
|. Subs. by G.S.R. 509, dated 26th May, 1982.

2, Subs. by G.S-R. 673 (E), dated 19th September, 1984.
3. Subs. by G.S.R. 283 (E), dated 18th March, 1985.
4. See now the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).

[PAGE 20]
The Arms Rules, 1962 45
the Union, the notice shall served personally through the Commanding Officer of such
member.

(6) Charges for maintaining in good condition articles deposited may be levied at
such rates as may be fixed from time to time by the State Government.

47. Deposit of arms and ammunition for safe custody otherwise than under
section 21.—(1) (a) A person lawfully possessing arms or ammunition may deposit
them for safe custody with a dealer holding a licence in Form XIV or in a police
station or, if he is a member of the armed forces of Union, in a unit armoury.

(b) Before accepting the arms or ammunition for deposit otherwise than under
section 21(1), the dealer or officer-in-charge of police station or unit armoury shall
satisfy himself that they are possessed under a valid licence issued under the Act and
these rules or under exemption from the need for such licence.

(c) Members of the armed forces of the Union may be allowed to keep their arms
or ammunition in safe custody in a unit armoury only during the tenure of their service.

(2) Where the arms or ammunition have been deposited under sub-rule (1), the.
dealer or the officer-in-charge of the police station or unit armoury shall—

(a) attach to each article deposited a card, easily distinguishable from. that
described in rule 46(2)(a) showing the following—
Deposit for safe custody:— nS
(1) Description (No. etc.) of article eRRuaWUea ARIS Het ERoTinS
(ii) | Name and address of depositor Rese Nostiwsteal in, nea eS
(iii) Particulars of licence/exemption ees auniusessi bax ycpuusaceranuavecest
(iv) Serial No. in register and date of GepoOSit......cccseeecenrenen
(v) Date of expiry of licence Fe ee eh ae
(vi) Date up to which deposited PT Creer
| Signature of depositor
Signature of dealer or officer-in-charge
of police station/unit armoury.
(b) issue to the depositor a receipt containing the particulars as in clause (a);
and
(c) on the same day send a copy of the receipt to the authority who granted
the licence or renewed it last.

(3) (a) In the event of failure to get the licence renewed, the arms or ammunition
shall continue to be possessed by the dealer on the authority of his licence in Form
XIV or by the officer-in-charge of the police station or unit armoury; but, if the licence
is not renewed for a period of 3 years after its expiry, the dealer or the officer-in-charge
of the police station or unit armoury shall bring this to the notice of the District Magistrate
for such action as he may consider necessary. _ .

[PAGE 21]
46 The Arms Rules, 1962
(b) the articles shall in no case be returned to the owner unless the licence to
possess them is renewed or a new licence is obtained.

'[(4) The depositor may be charged a fee for the custody of the articles deposited
at the following rates:—

1. For each fire-arm—Fifty rupees per year or portion thereof.
| 2. For every other weapon or package of ammunition—Rs. 25 per year or portion
thereof.

Any extra charges for maintenance of the articles in good condition may be levied
at such rates as may be fixed from time to time by the State Government.]

48. Records and returns of the articles deposited——(1) The dealer or the officerin-charge of the police station or unit armoury shall maintain such registers as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.

(2) A copy of the entries in the registers relating to the quarters ending on the last
day of March, June, September and December each year, certified as true copy under the
signature of the dealer or officer-in-charge of the police station or unit armoury, as the
case may be, shall be forwarded to the District Magistrate as early as possible after the
expiry of each quarter.

(3) The licensed dealer or the officer-in-charge of the police station or unit armoury
or of any other place specified under rule 46(3)(a)(i) where the arms or ammunition are
kept, shall submit to the District Magistrate by the 11th December each year a report
showing the particulars of arms or ammunition in their custody which have, or will become
liable to forfeiture by the end of that year.

49. Inspection.—(1) Arms and ammunition deposited in a police-station or with a
dealer and transferred to the district malkhana and the register maintained for the purpose
shall be inspected periodically by the District Magistrate or other officer appointed by
the State Government in this behalf in accordance with such procedure as may be

. prescribed by the State Government.

(2) The arms or ammunition deposited in a unit armoury and the register maintained
for this purpose shall be inspected periodically by the officer commanding the unit or any
other officer empowered by him in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the
Government of the State, where the unit is for the time, being located.

50. Previous consent in certain cases.—(1) A licence having effect beyond the local
limits of the authority of the officer granting it shall not be granted for the transport or
export or re-import of any arms or ammunition to a place, without ascertaining that there
is no objection to the grant of such licence on the part of—

(i) the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area in which such place
is situated; or 2
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 1, dated 19th December, 1997 (w.e.f. 3-1-1998).

[PAGE 22]
The Arms Rules, 1962 47

(ii) the Government of the State of Jammu and Kashmir, if such place is in
that State; or

(iii) the Secretary, General Administration Department, Government of
Pondicherry, if such place is in any of the ex-French settlements in India.

(2) For the purposes of sub-rule (1), either— |

(i) a certificate of ‘no objection’ may be obtained by the applicant for the
licence; or :

(ii) an enquiry may be made by the authority to whom application for grant
of such licence is made.

51. Application for licence.—Every application for the grant of a licence under
these rules— |

(a) shall be submitted in Form A;

(b) may be presented by the applicant in person or sent through the medium
of post office or otherwise, to the licensing authority, as far as possible
having jurisdiction in respect of the place where he ordinarily resides or
has his occupation;

(c) shall contain all such information as is necessary for the consideration
of the application, and in particular— |
(i) where the application is for the licence for the acquisition, possession

and carrying of arms and ammunition for crop-protection, shall specify
details of the land and cultivation requiring protection and area which
the arms or ammunition are required to be carried;

(ii) where the application is for a licence for import by land or river or
for export or for transport or for export, and re-import, or for import,
transport and re-export of arms or ammunition, shall specify the place
or destination, the route, the time likely to be occupied in the journey _
and the quantity, description and price of each kind of arms or™
ammunition in respect of which the licence is required and the purpose
for which they are intended;

(d) where the grant of licence requires a certificate of no objection from some
other authority as provided in rule 50, shall state whether such certificate
has been obtained and, if so, shall be supported by evidence thereof;

''(e) where an application is for the grant of licence in Form II, Form Ill,
Form IIIA, Form IV, Form V or Form VI from a person other than a
bona fide tourist as defined in section 10 (1) (b) of the Act it shall be
accompanied by two passport size copies of the latest photograph of the
applicant: |

Provided that—

(i) an application by a member of the armed forces of the Union shall be
made through his Commanding Officer to the licensing authority having
jurisdiction in respect of the place to which he is for the time being
posted; and

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 431, dated Lith February, 1969.

[PAGE 23]
48 The Arms Rules, 1962
(ii) the licensing authority may, in accordance with any instructions issued by
the State Government in respect of all or any class of fire-arms, require
the personal attendance of the applicant before granting or renewing the
licence applied for.

{S1A. The applicant shall not Suppress any factual information or furnish any

false or wrong information in the application form.]

52. Form of licence.—[(1) A licence in Form II, Form Ill, Form [ILA, Form Iv,
Form V or Form VI, if granted for more than a year, to a person other than Jona
fide tourist as defined in section 10(1)(b) of the Act, shall be in book-form and shall
contain the latest photograph of the licensee. ]

(2) When a licence is granted in Form I, Form Il, Form IIIA, Form IV, Form
V or Form VI for the possession of arms to be acquired by the licensee subsequent
to the grant of the licence, the authority granting the licence shall at the time of
granting the same, direct that within a period specified by him in this behalf, which
he may from time to time extend, the arms covered by the licence shall be acquired
and that the licence or the arms or both shall be produced for his inspection and if
within the period so specified or extended the licensee fails to acquire the arms and
to produced the licence or the arms or both, as the case may be, the licence shall cease
to be in force:

Provided that, if during the period so specified or extended, the licensee wishes
to acquire and possess any weapon or weapons of a different description and the
licensing authority has no objection to allow the acquisition and possession of such
weapon or weapons, he may amend the licence accordingly:

*[Provided further that—

(i) where the licensing authority is the State Government, the licensee residing
at any place within the State in which the license was issued may produce
the licence or the arms or both for inspection, before the State Government
or any authority which the State Government may, by a general or special
order, specify in this behalf:

(ii) where the licensing authority is the State Government, the licensee may,

. if he changes his place of residence from one State to another State,
produce the licence or arms or both for inspection before the Government
of the second mentioned State or any authority which ‘that Government
may, by a general or special order, specify inthis behalf:

(iii) where the licensing authority is other than the State Government, the
licensee may if he changes his place of residence, produce the licence or
arms or both for inspection before the licensing authority of the place of
his new residence to which the licensee may have shifted after the grant
of licence,

within the period so specified, or extended and the authority other than the licensing
authority who inspected the arms as well as the licensee shall intiprate the fact of such
Inspection to the authority who issued the licence. ]

ree Eh ee Cee eee a el A

I. Ins. by G.S.R. 52 (E), dated 24th January, 1989 (w.e.f. 24-1-1989).

2. Subs. by G.S.R. 634, dated 3rd April, 1970. |
3. Ins. by S.O. 1283, dated 3rd May, 1963, and subs. by G.S.R. 634, dated 3rd April, 1970.

[PAGE 24]
The Arms Rules, 1962 49

53. Variation of conditions of licences.—(1) On application from a licence-holder,

a licensing authority may extend the area of validity specified in his licence, if he is

Satisfied about the need of such extension, subject to the condition that the licensing
authority has the power to grant a licence in relation to the area to which extension
is sought.

(2) On application from a company holding a licence in Form II or Form III, for
a change in the name of the member, agent or other representative of the company
in whose name the licence has been granted or of a retainer included in the licence
the necessary amendment may be made by the licensing authority,

54, Renewal of licences.—{1) Every licence may, at its expiration and subject to
the same condition (if any) as to the grant thereof, be renewed by the authority
mentioned in Schedule II as renewing authority:

[Provided that the licence so renewed may be signed in the appropriate column
of the licence by such officer as may be specially empowered in this behalf by the
State Government under rule 4.|

(2) The authority issuing a licence shall ordinarily be responsible for watching all
future renewals of the licence. Where a licence is renewed by an authority other than
the authority who granted it, the former shall forthwith inform the latter of the fact
of renewal and the period for which such renewal js valid. The applicant for the
renewal of a licence under this rule shall always be required to state his permanent
residence, and, if he notifies a change in his permanent residence to the district in
which the renewal is sought, the licensing authority of such district shall hence-forward

become responsible for watching all future renewals of his licence and shall inform

the original issuing authority accordingly. The procedure shall be repeated on each
subsequent occasion of renewal of the licence, the necessary intimation being sent by

the renewing authority to the original issuing authority or to the authority who last
renewed the licence on a permanent change of residence, as the case may be. Pe

(3) An application for renewal of a licence for arms or ammunition deposited
under sub-rule (1) of rule 47 may be made by the depositor, or where it is not practicable
to make the application direct, through the: dealer or any other person authorised by
him in this behalf while the arms or ammunition continue to be so deposited.

(4) The licensing authority may consider an application for renewal of a licence,
if the period between the date of its expiry and the date of application is not, in his
opinion, unduly long with due regard to the circumstances of the case, and all renewal
fee for the intervening period are paid; otherwise the application may be treated as
one for grant of a fresh licence.

55. *[Appeal against the order of a licensing authority or an authority suspending or revoking a licence under section 17(6)].—In any case in which an authority
issues an order—

(a) refusing to grant or renew a licence or to give an objection certificate for —
such grant or renewal, or
(b) varying any condition of a licence or Suspending or revoking a licence
under sub-section (1), or sub-section (3), or sub-section (6) of section 17,
the person aggrieved by such order may, within thirty days from the date
eee ee
1, Added by G.S.R. 1011 (A), dated 7th August, 1972. :
2. Subs. by S.O, 1470, dated 23th May, 1963.

[PAGE 25]
50 The Arms Rules, 1962
of issue of the order, and subject to the proviso to sub-section (2) of
section 18, prefer an appeal against that order to the concerned appellate
authority.

56. Procedure to be followed by the appellate authority—On receipt of an
appeal the appellate authority may call for the records of the case from the authority
who passed the order appealed against and after giving the appellant a reasonable

- opportunity of being heard, pass final orders.

57. Fee payable for licence—(1) '[(a) Every licence granted or renewed under
these rules shall, save as herein otherwise expressly provided, be chargeable with the
fee (if any) specified in Schedule IV.]

(b) In any case where fee is prescribed for a year, free for a fraction of a year
shall be the same as for a whole year.

(2) Where a licensee submits his application for renewal of his licence after the
expiry of the period for which the licence was granted, the licensing authority may,
if he decides to renew the licence, at his discretion levy—

(a) full fee as for initial grant of the licence, and

(b) if he is satisfied that the delay is not justifiable, or excusable, nor serious
enough to warrant revocation of the licence or prosecution of the licensee,
a late fee not exceeding the amount of the licence fee is charged, or
'TRs, 100] in other cases.

(3) The Central Government may, by general or special order and for reasons to
be recorded in writing and subject to such conditions, if any, as it may specify in the
order, grant exemption from, or reduction of, the fee payable in respect of any licence:

Provided that it shall be a condition of every exemption from payment of the fee
chargeable in respect of the grant or renewal of any licence, in Form III that if
application for renewal of such licence is not made within one month of the date on
which the licence expires, the licensing authority may, unless the applicant satisfies
the licensing authority that he had sufficient cause for not making the application

_ within that period, levy renewal fee at the rate specified in the Form.

(4) No separate fee shall be chargeable from retainers.

(5) No fee shall be chargeable in respect of the grant or renewal of a licence in
Form XV by a State Government or the Board of Revenue (in the State of Andhra
Pradesh, Kerala or *[Tamil Nadu]) for the import of sulphur in reasonable quantities,
if the State Government or the Board of Revenue is satisfied that the sulphur is required
in good faith for medicinal, industrial or agricultural purposes (other than for
manufacturing arms, ammunition or explosives).

(6) Any political representative authorised to grant licences in Form XVIII may
remit the fee payable in respect of the grant or renewal of any such licence in the case
of arms or ammunition exported for personal use, or in the case of ammunition exported
for use for blasting purposes (whether on a public work or not) of the Government
of any territory or place outside India.

(7) (i) No fee shall be chargeable for the grant of a licence for export and reimport of any arms or ammunition in a case or package legibly addressed to a person
lawfully entitled to possess such articles, in compliance with a requisition made by a
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 1, dated 19th December, 1997 (w.e.f. 3-1-1998).

2. Subs. by G.S.R. 783, dated Ist July, 1974.

[PAGE 26]
| ) The Arms Rules, 1962 51
| such person for the supply of such articles in reasonable quantities for his own use
or after carrying out necessary repairs thereto.

(ii) Where any arms or ammunition are imported under a licence into any customs
port in India and re-exported thence for re-import into any other customs port in India
under rule 35 the necessary licence for such re-export and re-import under the said
rule shall be chargeable with a fee of rupee one only,

(8) No fee shall be chargeable in respect of—

(i) a change of description of the weapon entered in a licence granted for
its acquisition under proviso to rule 52 (2) but if the licence fee in respect
of the weapon so changed is higher than that for the original weapon,
the difference of such fee may be charged;

(ii) an endorsement under rule 12 of a licence granted in the State of
Pondicherry or endorsement to extend or change the area of validity of
a licence under sub-rule (1) of rule 53:

(iii) a change of name, under rule 53 (2), of member, agent or other
representative of the company or retainer: or

(iv) a grant of consent or permit/certificate or endorsement or any other.
document under these rules, except as otherwise expressly provided.

58. Fee payable for copies and duplicates.—Where a licence granted or renewed
under these rules in lost or accidentally destroyed, the authority empowered to grant
such licence may grant a duplicate—

(a) where the original licence was granted without the payment of ‘any fee,
on payment of a fee of '[Rs. 50]; and

(b) in any other case on payment of a fee of ‘IRs. 100] or the fee with which
the original licence was chargeable: whichever is less. |

59. Fee payable on a petition for appeal made under section 18(1).— Every
petition for appeal under section 18 (1) shall be accompanied by a fee of —

(a) ‘[Rs. 100], if the fee for the licence in relation to which the appeal is «>
preferred is '[Rs. 50] or more; and
(b) '[Rs. 50] in any other case.

60. Collection of fees.—All fees payable shall be paid in cash either in person
or, at the option of the person concerned, by a money order/postal order, at the time
of application.

61. Dealers to maintain registers, etc. in certain cases.—Where no licence is
required for the manufacture, sale, import, export or transport of any category or
description of arms or ammunition by or through a dealer, the dealer may be asked
to register his name and address and place of business in such manner and at such
place as the Central Government may prescribe and the dealer shall maintain such
register and furnish such information to the Central Government as it may require in
respect of the arms or ammunition so manufactured, sold, imported, exported, or
transported.

62. Production of licence—(1) Any person who—

(a) holds a licence granted or renewed or pass, permit or certificate granted
under these rules, or
(6) is acting under colour of such licence, pass, permit or certificate, shall
forthwith produce such licence, pass, permit or certificate upon demand
Se a een eee
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 1, dated 19th December, 1997 (w.e.f. 3-1-1998). ’

[PAGE 27]
52 The Arms Rules, 1962
by any Magistrate or any police officer of a rank not below that of an
officer-in-charge of a police station.

(2) While granting or renewing a licence, no authority shall impose a condition
inconsistent with sub-rule (1).

'((3) If a person who holds a licence in Form I] changes his place of residence,
permanently or temporarily for more than thirty consecutive days, and carries with
him the weapon concerned by the licence, to a place other than indicated in column
2 of the licence, he shall *{within thirty days of such change], send intimation about
such change to the licensing authority of the place or his new residence as well as
to the authority which granted the licence or last renewed it, as the case may be, and
shall on demand forthwith produce the licence and the weapon to the first mentioned
authority for making necessary entry in the licence to indicate these in the particulars
of the new residence of the licensee. |

‘((4) The licensee shall intimate within a period of thirty days in regard to change
of residence to the licensing authority of the new place of his residence and produce
his licence before the licensing authority of the new place for appropriate endorsement.
On such change of residence and after such endorsement on the licence, the said
licence shall be deemed to have been transferred to the jurisdiction of the licensing
authority and renewing authority of the new place of residence and such authority
shall be the licensing authority and the renewing authority in relation to the said
licence for purposes of provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 and the Arms Rules, 1962.]

63. Production of arms.—The authority by whom any licence in Form I, Form
IIl, Form IV, Form V or Form VI has been granted or renewed may, for the purposes
of satisfying itself that any arm covered by such licence are still in the possession of
the licensee, at any time while the licence is in force by order in writing, require the
licensee-—

(a) to produce the arms at such time and place for inspection of such officer
as may be specified in the order; or
(b) at the option of the licensee to produce a certificate from—
. (i) a Magistrate or the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station in
whose jurisdiction the licensee resides or has his occupation, or
(ii) if he is a Government servant, a gazetted officer to whom he Is
subordinate, ic:
to the effect that he has seen the arms in the possession of the licensee and that they
correspond to the description given in the licence. _

64. Savings——(1) The Indian Arms Rules, 1951, are hereby repealed.

(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken (including
any exemption, exclusion or withdrawal made, fee imposed, levied, remitted or reduced
or power conferred) or deemed to have been done or taken under the said rules, shall,
so far as it is consistent with these rules, be deemed to have been done or taken under
the corresponding provisions of these rules. 7
|. Ins. by G.S.R. 653, dated 17th May, 1975.

2. Subs. by G.S.R. 1198, dated 29th August, 1977 (w.e.f. 17-9-1977).
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 1250, dated 4th October, 1978.

[PAGE 28]
The Arms Rules, 1962 53
SCHEDULE J
’ (See rule 3)
Category Arms Ammunition
I 2 3
| (a) Prohibited arms as defined in section 2 (1) (i) Prohibited ammunition as defined in section 2
and such other armsas the Central Government 1) (h) and such other articles as the Central
may, by notification in the Official Gazette overnment may, by notification inthe Official
specify to be prohibited arms. Gazette, specify to he prohibited ammunition.
‘[(b) Semi-automatic fire-arms, other than those Ammunition for arms of category I(b).
included in categories a and III (a), smooth- bore guns having barrel of less than 20" in
length.
(c) Bolt action or semi-automatic rifles of ".303" Ammunition for fire-arms of category I(c).
or 7.62 mm. bore or any other bore which can
chamber and fire service ammunition of ".303"
or 7.62 mm, calibre; muskets, of .410 "bore or
any other bore which can fire .410" musket
ammunition; pistols, revolvers or carbines of
any bore which can chamber and fire ".380" or |
"455" rimmed cartridges or service 9 mm, or
".45" rimless cartridges. }
(d) Accessories for any fire-arms ceianed or Nil.
adapted to diminish the notice or flash caused )
by the firing thereof.
Il Machinery or manufacture or proof-testing of Machinery for manufacturing ammunition.
a fire-arm. |
Ill Fire-arms other than those in categories I, I], Ammunition for fire-arms other than those in
and IV, namely:— categories, I, IJ and IV, namely:—
te) Revolvers and pistols. Ammunition for fire-arms of category mee
b) Breech-loading rifles other than .22 bore Ammunition for fire-arms of category II(b).
rifles mentioned in eategcry III (c) below.
(c) .22 bore (low velocity) rifles using rim- Ammunition for fire-arms of category III(c),
fire cartridges, breech-load smooth bore
guns and air-rifles.
(d) Air-guns and es guns. Ammunition for fire-arms of cateogry III(d). -“
IV Curios and historical weapons otherthan those Curios and historical ammunition.
excluded under section 45(c),
VY Arms other than fire-arms: shay ceecd and Nil.
deadly weapons, namely—swords (including
sword-sticks)., daggers, bayonets, spears
(including lances and javelins): battle-axes,
Knives (including kirpans and khukries) and
other such weapons with blades lon ger than 9"
or wider than 2" other than those designed for
domestic, agricultural, scientific or industrial
purposes; steel batton; "Zipo" and other such
weapons, called "life oe machinery
formaking arms other than eaieeney I]; and any
other arms which the Central Government
may notify under section 4,
Vi (a) *[Articles containing explosives or
fulminating materials; fuses and
frictions tubes other than blank fire
cartridges].
V1 (b) Ingredients as defined in section 2(1)
(b) (VIN), |
arms accessories for charges belong to the same category as the arms or ammunition.
a
1, Subs. by G.S.R. 1638, dated 2nd July, 1969,
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 994 (E), dated 19th December, 1990 (w.e.f, 19-12-1990),

[PAGE 29]
54 |
The Arms Rules, 1962
eZ
‘S |
3 on | | |
-
Es ea) ” S = =
pz 7
R—| |
Fs as E
: = : 3
£ ° «: E
= Z ‘ bb &
— 6 & & s Ee
< =a O 2 = 3 =
: eeu 8 5 E
5 6822 4 a E
Pd “ = fa
c A
wa a 2 hn Ee
2% ae ghskecs goes
B8é ££ SEZS LES = ci ¢
; Chet = int eet ie & §
a a oO oo CS 2: 20% oe s
s[hak $2 6 SEBEL SEL 6S SES
a3 > & PSRR22 Ry PSs a:
J |*2¢ Es Ee SEL ESE ee:
fx} es a S863 8 ZERBS
os
> 22 ls EE 5 Ee :
R38 2 “| gs 85 2
Oats i - 63 <
aA o | 8 f2 ¢ ai 3
peo re .
t _t GA
Z mre
= oo
: s > P aad
' wy t rt
6 2 5; 28 E z aa"
a2 +; & 5 3 B eRe
fe = ZB. = ea an
as 8 E- =) “= S
me i. =
ass
gpee 3 = AS pSiick S Eye S85
eGsgal-| ¢ £2882 3 _* B25
gee% 3 s SEES ¢ 5 g33
S88 a SC = “as
qa” | aa
z al 8 6 & ee ee: eee
Bar #89 Bese woe
ZEB 2 % 29286 BSR
8s a 2 ae ‘ee
Es i ) : AAA
— cl eel
mA cn.

[PAGE 30]
The Arms Rules, 1962 55
ae
o
\ ~>
Bysee8 . ae dese
Cf S SUK 23yS9R8u
a | | Seyees | | sSS8eS Fee
Pie =R2REESE
2 © GS
— 5) > ™ wo .. vaya ES .
° ) oe
PakRs se eaccaiel
>
“ = = = =
2 = a, = of
F F 2.83% wes
a & ag>89 GEER
Bi Eh & SE ob ao
ed S&6oo Ss BE Eos. 3
= = TeevzvosazepEves FA
36 OS Srabggeese es 5
c|/e § Bessggeenses -
F 4 rari i a
A 6 ARSRZHS RS RS8 z
News
ov i i Fs
“nA oO 2s Oo a. 9 a) as
om _oD a 2 a 2 =
emi & YU a & ay is
siies ss gE eg.
eo 289 Be 6 8 S & 3
SESS a8 co ga Oo a5
\o sd ho > 3 ¥ 3% = 9
SeeRS gS & ic A= fit ; =F
ew
oS
3 : 6&8 §
FE 5 5 £ E=6 ="
wD & S S > fe “
Bb E a a o 3
a a 8 =) 0 ea»
= > =| 3 ~ 2
so I o 2 &. 22 Sef.
2 8 gz Em — oF &
a A <8 <8 eg28
r}
=
a 62d
_ oa 28 Seced f.
5 38s sea sa8skZ ae
v o 4 ) gy o2&— E
Pe es 46s 46 ¢ 42 5508 sd
3 = O Eb bo Sea 8S zo .
+ 1a sa ERs &2c SSelas S |
_ a
=

[PAGE 31]
56 The Arms Rules, 1962
ay t ' i |
mo Ses St
e255 Ss es 25
= Vw ves oa §$ Oo w
2uvxeoeg se SDoSeEve ta
Se ESSE S omhtw b= &
oA —
SSEBSaS PEER AS F
* < < < < e
a fo st = = =
—
o
#355 = q 3 oD
Omid F ie e
. yo wi wi wi Te
Eggs 2s “bh ‘bh "bk =
nar Yow ie i ft)
BY cz pi s a oot o
= >i oO s ‘= s s =
e - = a o (=) Q aE
~ 2 oe oO R's 5 es — ao
=
5 g&> Ge 3 2 2 &&
Zz moma G5 fan fan a wn a
| | =
=~ o ‘ wo o Sonu i os ons o
ao & © Seseqe"%s tse Suess
53 > 5 SE2SzySe8wEe 22ERS
Oo Yu om ST BEE ve SS 5 2 Bays So
a =o a = So 225 26 0 5% 2 9622 2
Zoos og Mono lZVo SH UWoav Fs
Ses 3 & ebSeeeoetscess £5 Fx .
3 2 2 BSH Pree SC Re 8S 4b Pe
chews ee SBHSSHE SESE SEAS ES
>
> ic: ye) ae
el va —
so, a hos. = ot
Bae oe eR SE Ba rr 45 ae SB
moe > O o oO
Z2setosebae Fs “4 z = SoBe
92S S650 AZ wa & 4222 o..
Y2o 2a om IES oi on E boo Fe &
~SPSEREsELf eC wo oI a oO = O's
Ga. c 2s ae > > = = = Sees
ur mat saorfog ck © 2 — _ — 6 = ©
~o 02 = OG E — oe 2 7) od ea
S89 O*%S SSE ESE ye e mt OPsog 2 4
2 Y ae a Stee a = = “ = & =
" - =
Seretos FES sae a) a) 7 O 6 @a..e
CS
ect il M El o
55 go £38 5
3 S 2, ce & Ge: > og
ee o Oo & So =
coe = 4 9 O La 5
rae =! on! ~~ AD
c 3 oo ovo cc = O 4=
ce ce & e £2 ie io = oO
es
- i
n == -= 223
z S i bate
— ee
o”
_ 2i5 25 |
‘ f Ss mH moO. wa
SSS 5B 08
oO i i
o BER MSs
—_ ae
Z2egaeSeae
SF eU se cr GS
= SaSszrsse &
fu oF = = @
oO co fe a oc
eg AS OS Sa 5

[PAGE 32]
The Arms Rules, 1962 cy
a | | | | | | |
nl nt
—
: :
=~ .
wo «66D
3 3 rs 3 & aoe 9
= = = = ee 2as o
s 2 2 2 85 §&Sss o
~ FF @ P E AE WM: 8 2
4 bane = _ 7)
) 2 2 2 os fe Py
Zz Z. a FA soe —
a w
ue a oils 13 2. ast
3 . oO ; ©) i O ay 53 0's 5 =
Mel rs Oo rm ' e
23 B 3 7S 23 $8855 ae
bei i a4. Gos fet
> oO > Oo > oO > Oo oot Sf g o
is 55 as ie £22se3 2 3 |
ad es uw £ 5 5 5s 5 e 2 eo ERR
oO oq ° o — np oe a = 4
a Oo oc g o So Ser Ses See
= = = yy — — i ie a =o 6 :
oa | 5 8 i = | a -— iP >
ee Ee’ Ee 2 ce BEZE SS Se2
ot tot emt = es =
m
2 : om .
» £ : _ E se2 of 2¢
—_— — es wee J oO = & oo
‘ = = clog
: Js Ye = rae 23 ei om 2£O 5 w= oO ie
— _ = :— or Of eke Sesaege =
e £262 §& S35 BSE ee fSsg855.5<
FE Besa a Ss SePteeeee: 233825 ES
wo Ane V®VOna . PoP 2s a) = — Ce
> 4°O = was > ae == — ~*~ = -
S$ szksese gdesebecs .sienes 8%
“le Eo 22545 eSESesssesee esses Ce
as _ — pet wa
S ABEL 8<f SPESaASSSSSPAPTESE ae
A Qanasna SOR a a cn, a sod oS
— = = — — Gs 2 SP
— — a) nt — —
on
= = a *
2 Ce ne 3 =)
cE. ORES EE 2 th bh 5
E@ 2 ¥ e528 SEG = od aa 2s =
GH 33 07 BZ eS | eS es ae
*)/ S856 ae Sse: fe US FS Ey
= = = fo = os aa eS
—,
qt
in — a
= = < —
a < a S
oe = ] — ——
— ea — —
nn] = — > ~— —
eh
; “a
a Wa Cay
n vo & - oO
> ds 1 ob ee 2°64
~ ei oD SS he mm an ty 8 5
E> vA YM & a e eC 2a x “ui oS
5 58 S85 syeesea aE SoG 8 o's
2S a >a SESS Ss. Se Leese
“I ou a gy 2 s2oSaeoe SE c oe >
& ‘sp. > SSA w Ye 6 k a aS =
5 o £ bo 4 G x 2 oO "a1 = & bp
ae © 5 eS os SEES. SESS 2
~ Oo aso d A ee A 2 6 ji. a &
BS¢ FeRs SSG8s 8 § # Sk4n 3g
O.6 & Be 2k & =>P®S5 6 2 GE Uns’ Y& x
— fw We] ™ os

[PAGE 33]
58 The Arms Rules, 1962
a | | | | |
fame
pon = boat —;
oo ba i Ss = *. 5
ind _ bo nt in bo
= CG
E 5 E = 8
) oY ie) uo
= > so > > =
o o go oO o re
on : p 6 8
te Ps
nl he =o! dl
a a” “ns “ 7) a
i
es
bi 8
4 OU tt th. os : a 2 . oa
oes Ea 8 BS Eg gs Ey
2 a9 Poe 25 2 262 ous
a. 4.2 args as a2 3 a4 8 as
2 o a a Q 7 oo & @o oO 29
2s fe 26 e232 Eae B25
sel o
SEs 43 32 = 2s ee =o
Bs g a
582 5
iP . .
2 259 ¢ 2 geo
é 5 ans 2 S #3 >
2a 8 S E De
E eS OO = Ww) E E Eo. &
o 7} “ Oo o 525 2
3 S = RS 3 z 5° BE
va S & 3% > S 5 Obsé&
a 0 '§ 8 2a a) o 2%
s | Aeeg & § See 9
“A “A Oso 4) wy “moo
A |
EE Sy 2
“i o
ae S 8 oi
mM a a Ey
2 Ae se ° - g 2
t 3 = = not 8
vf] pai ~~ — ) tf)
> =
« ™2 — —
en == BS 5 = a
=e = =~ — tJ) oe
Os — ef ~ =
es
25%
hk i oe ys a Ss =
tes a be | op a5 L P we Ewa , wm cg S86
oO ta “ow Eas ea] a og sg og &
Sxséo8sG8 an 538 eeuage cS Se saz
a] 28288855 ces Hae €12.228 &7 8%
DEES L SYS ak: Loo 2oyron £25
az 2 Uo eu Sw Bu £2 wos 67 Wh 3
Ssseseeoushesoece Measee@ Flags KLE,
“$s, 8 hn 2 2 eee Ee ec 9.8 Ss ow. 2 ae wt
SESERERS ESS EH S8ESE BSESE BEES
oe 208 2 ak & Os. m2 Fw oszake & “ne2 8
x So — ci cr
== == = — _—

[PAGE 34]
The Arms Rules, 1962 59
> io
i
5S » 23 ' ree g
SoS S S22 hy x esp eu Este,
™ 2 Ss 2s S 4 ot 6 Sew>,seescad
23855 €E855 BEZEL LSgFs
eS 8 Bet 3235 8 a 2582
* 82 2 ee228 » SSERBSE
Balke
E i 5 :
oe OO re Be Se
+ — pal
on
=
Ms :
2 ‘s rs "a a a
ae = s < = =
— 6 te vo v cP) o rv
5 5 cS fa a = a]
2 2 2 o 2 2
ES ° ° ° co °
vw) ah Fa m4 i fs
a Pe)
a2
Le] S
ae
wo oe > Gas.
oe 0 r
Suvoese ,
seERS
o om
—
. “ E @ £& © .=
>t § a) £5 2 f ae qua AL eS ¢
a6 € oe 2 oss 5 2 §s.88§ S28
ee. =] a a mH «
eee be 4o gex<S E's a gpeeees
oY s o 2 ‘on a tA v ~ » SPEARS SY
E25 > eo 'S SS > 2 e of > 2's ODE B
“od ec ss 0 = oO o + 2 s BenefLee
ws ES © Os . Sy stn Ot) oo 5 Osa FV o
2 o8 s=86 Bo885 Fe SEx¢2E 8S B2SgR8EE
o ow” & 2's BSB o's sc b2'3 = ‘5 E2eEsSLYS
On mm aS nekR§ 8 Gott? 6 wi Sw 6 5 sc -
Vos Om OFagkw ea me ons SO al Oe Doals
stot CS) 2 () os ve = es)
“1 Oo “" —— ee ae a — ~—_
3 =] a
a aS sat S oe a =
; = A ;
26a 9S woBte § sb Bec
oS =u 8 6o-= Ys = of & = os
ia SZ Sesa4ss 25 EeSsesove
2 2SoS& #8842uvér0 £S sSMAREascESE
Br es) 2 () os a = s 8 Ge gv
a al — il a nl a — eel
—_
= i = r
—
a aS s Aap 7,
oe =F FA ee Coe <
= ‘ss fy Cy ry “
— ol — al ‘sme —
= -- .
2 : 5 5 §
a Ay . E a = bs
4 ce) od oo os
on > a > iD &
8 3 ae eo PERE s
25 e's E< ! Hass
t a S ~
— eal —s — —

[PAGE 35]
60 The Arms Rules, 1962
. >
v is 7"
S
‘5 5 fe) 8 fone g 2 b »
a rf ooo De = es
S38 eseiSas? et | Soe s |
Sao & 2£ge3 8 é 6 ‘boo
alf@S x2 SSB as S338
= & mE eo Fea ws © S&B E
S82 oy A AOE E bo poe oF SB
Ce) — ‘a A =]
ages asa res2a
= =
: : =
oO Ps *
|
: §
- a ‘a |
~ © B =
e 2 |
° ° o
Z Z px
= | | | |
ie)
ES 6
“ & & Eg gS.
v s) ‘> bes par ~
oa es EES? 5S 6 p=)
mE 2 Ere S2ex S
os a meee es S
a. oP ESonapég s a = |
wn EY = > ee) > = ‘3 |
os = efskesk fs g
ae O42sg>20 % a a &
oie 2 ‘S Ba. Be ges @ =
oF 8 a o 2 o DoS of 6 o
16 ae fa Of22s808<46 8
Oo re Oo : Y oS
a ao 8 Bast 3
gt 3 oD Pr 3 = 8
SSke SSE a GE ges |
Eu ae EuaSHgy Boa
eb Sts Ssfseso8g gg SSE |
m2 6 2 je SHS ee ao nA namam
oP oy }
i Bs §&
. =a Ww .
a = a a oom |
aos wie a 0 . OT GS 3
idee 2ee> Sigg kaha
ae meee S soe ER ES AP RD
> BARRE SS BSS eae |
~~, —, eo i
7 | g S LADS SMAS
-
S
—
_ [a E
>
t
Wo
4 — '

[PAGE 36]
The Arms Rules,
GS, a
i a
esesfecs | |
Sa kec Se
SeSeSE ES
o
YLESSE SS
A
= 5 5 5S se 8
tr
S a "a
E i tt
a s S : s
: : 5 @ D o |
a3 i : :
3 = | =} o 2 E
: a Zz Z
ff a 2 5
tt y) E E
o
FA
o| | . or | Ss
: re BE 2 3 me S
e+ Som 8k a SS ee E- E
: se opeeeeee FUE UG CG
eg = ww “3 & Ss S
Te = BES° ESS = aa 8 3
E cos 22s taga28 5 2 # 2
25 se 0.84 & : S .
e s 2
< => GE <.
<a = o> ,
E Susy Bukg SS_ES 2g.
PESER ESS S226 ERasS S 2
Shas aed on 253%
E eesegeds ORES naw & a
25ERRSS 5 =) =) = coal
“le £ )
[es
ers er ae a ri eu
— » 9 — * ak el sae!
=£ 355 GR ES OEY aes
co} << = S
o Gg
=
bbe ;
cw} i :
a :
EE E
eS ; |
ne & *
a
ro

[PAGE 37]
62 The Arms Rules, 1962
a
es oO
es
S&sEe
oe 38025
ASS Ss
* SOEZ
ec Ps
a "a
bo
3 S 246
ol a E55
=) o eos
2.
Ms Zz. w= a
ol | | |
=
= 2 > SE oS a) i ee
— Safe oc c a a =
i BSaSezes § RS 5 5
a 2ZoRESEZ CS 2 Q >
3 eageperes e235
“ = > tw me 2 : => v >
a _— = "on
Oo) 2s SSeS essbad se sc
£5 SBHEotS SE RBE DO ‘Se © a
= fea a= a 2? 6 - §- o§=F a
Z BSeEC eee EZ 8 FBas
* eo OU 6S & aow
"a 1
«| S “al Ty
Z | |
=
— ' i =
mi a e n
- Ad” ea os
a], = e272 : —-o
< ie ho SB YESSE
ot 4 wa th
3 : “A i o a o
EZ E oak #8 gs¢é Ao 8 mm
— oa —_ Sard es ss
-&8§3 68 442% -EUSES EOE B asses
PARSER SES HEL ESPsEsyses FS aSs
hs Qo = a ; = of) go S
ESavcteees & Ss EV OomMAPrTRER Ee’. « aq & x “
ow = o co vy Oo v 2A yy Y sg -= a ao + om,
| | PEBRSSSet Sse FSSESRSESES Feagezes
EEBSvSeseeZ2s s =a scspeotewnoarast <seeBsEsS
— ~ cy
_ ol ra ci

[PAGE 38]
The Arms Rules, 1962 63
teed
=
a= ov a
= oS a 3 ee. ot
a a ac ra
re o = ry ON we By
a a2 oO O'S
= Bat Os
: 22
- oO Ww
= gyc8 seu
rH Teo O > an)
> Fs & 29 & aN
= Bas 2 =
ny =~ o's =
See “a '
E oe e q 2S S
a a
0% 0 a eS =
_ ee Oe Si bo
S 6h - =e a
° Po ae us >5 mo
= Ec Ag Ss s
: 2» | 32° :G OS a3
_ .
e 5 4 m7) - oe
oo — a ee | - 0) ES
“ Cd
ee a ° .: °SE a
a= oO] 4 3 eS i an
rani aw + (3, O ry . 3 BD =
on = et Sk nai os ¥ (La
os ~ 2 Og - > 4 OS tI14}2 as
=) Cm 5 co fl st 0% o = zits % |
A. el 5
=e x © ao Noe ine & a le ie a |
Ss se ; : Boo ; Z | o
¥ 5 o A Ee : Of of Lx) = en *
fe EO ten a me gaa! (1, & “s
nf = be tS © o - =
tat 2 =
a F Su Mm |e x De
5 a5 o 2 Oe O o oO ww
oU8 Qa te O ow Pr 2 3
“7 A — © O WY real r >~eao” Bau = bo
o & int 2 ra * a = 2 a)
aS 2325 ; (825 As
= ee Ml CN 7 © S
oe 2 : . y
= ae ho ‘. : Oo = DO
S . $ g Ses 32
oe Sf ; og ese 33
A ty Ou 8 = ' em gti © as
3 ¢ >is : 2 2.5 = oO <
“ — a
pa a
re t) =
om fo Ss & = om o n
oo eee 3 AE . O ed
> + o 6 ow a ee oo
CT} * TH tA . a pies
pea lena eS ; “5
_ - 9 OS aj ba om | ear .
1) i] ; Ps a
cv : peat
Zz in — : a _
Et fal — oO

[PAGE 39]
64 The Arms Rules, 1962 |
CONDITIONS |
1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of Arms Act, 1959 and of |
the Arms Rule, 1962.
2. It covers only the arms or ammunition specified in columns 2, 3 and 4 and |
for the purposes shown in column 9.
3. In case of import or transport— |
(a) an account of the contents of each package shall be legibly written thereon;
(b) bulk shall not be broken before the articles reach the place of destination;
(c) the articles shall be delivered only to a person lawfully entitled to receive
them.
4. In cases of transport by rail, each package shall be marked with the words
“Fire-arms Category I” or “Fire-arms, Category II” as the case may be, in such manner
as to be readily recognisable by the Railway authorities.
5. In the case of possession, the licensee shall—
(a) on demand by an authorised officer produce the arms possessed under
this licence;
(b) not sell or transfer any arms or ammunition or any part thereof covered
by this licence to any person not lawfully entitled to possess them:
(c) forthwith give information at the nearest police-station of the loss or
theft of any arms or ammunition covered by this licence; and
(d) give prior intimation to the licensing authority concerned of his intention
to break up or dispose of any fire-arms or ammunition or any part thereof
| (otherwise than as mentioned in the note below); failing which, proof of
the articles having been broken up or disposed of will have to be furnished
to the satisfaction of the licensing authority.
6. The authority granting or renewing the licence has the right to enquire at any
time during the currency of the licence whether the. weapon for which it has been
granted is still in the possession of the licensee and may require the production of the !
weapon for the purpose of such an enquiry. |
Note.—Licensees are warned that in case they sell or transfer any arms or |
ammunition covered by the licences possessed by them to any person, they shall
forthwith inform in writing the District Magistrate, having jurisdiction or the officerin-charge of the nearest police-station, of such sale or transfer together with the
particulars of the fire-arms and ammunition and the person to whom they have been
sold or transferred (section 5 of the Arms Act, 1959). Failure to give such information |
is punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine, which may extend to Rs. 500, or with both [section 25(3) of the Act].

[PAGE 40]
.

The Arms Rules, 1962

2 a Po

$0 fof s
> |58 ao 3
=2o4" Heb 3

S oc 2

2 2 e ff,"

: 5 eo tet

Ss |* fob

= a

= ae a

. ue 4 Ge

ce Tite 7 ’

‘ a9 min 4 o .

= ae fe 8 = 2

= 62 6 - ig! 3S ob &

: VOY eee ee ah es

fe a er an 2 3

~~ & GD e 3 4

aa 7 ti ee OD

‘tomy = a : _

So ms = : 4 a cd |

ct > =

§ = © .. 3 fr) poet

co | + - Sai: ome ; |
5 Sic of wy
—_ iL
c CY ao 5 = §
- 2 9 -

= CF ae OS

= = eee ne
= ws ran)

: =e |e zz a
5 § S ie < | o co
© « oO. < : e

= “hes on = 3

° 4 2 2 6 .

ae rey

~ 240 |e c

= < ce Oo o :

- - = = Vv :

s eg ~}2z 9 z

: : Ole od <

=} ae : o a8 :

wi ‘3 ? 2 3

a _— 3 E

w a E

wi)

oo & as :

° S :

ad a fo |

a) aS :

Po = i

» 2 3 é

S

° = as _ g

pha net 5 - :

a ks : E

e 7 ow 5 ,

ee =o. = ie

re: :

o cf = ; ° je

Some og a 7 “

2 |ecs >, oO

cal Be Nae 5

a — ia

cv) ag oS — : : F

Ban o 2 YO = = :

= ae 2 : :

ons - 2
= ES a E
x» | 2 2 :
eo |e 2
—

[PAGE 41]
66 The Arms Rules, 1962
CONDITIONS

1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 and
of the Arms Rules, 1962.

2. It covers only the arms or ammunition specified in columns 2, 3 and 4 so long
as they are kept in the place described in column 5, but does not authorise the licensee—

(i) to carry arms;

(ii) to keep Government arms or ammunition.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this condition—

(a) “Government arms” means a fire-arms or other weapon which is the
property of Government; and

(b) “Government ammunition” means ammunition manufactured in any
Government factory as prepared for and supplied to Government other
than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian
use.

3. Condition 2(i1) may be cancelled by the authority granting the licence empowered
to do so by the Central Government, and an endorsement added showing the
Government arms or ammunition which the licensee is authorised to possess.

4. The licensee shall—

(a) on demand by an authorised officer produce the arms possessed under
this licence;

(b) not sell or transfer any arms or ammunition or any part thereof covered
by this licence to any person not lawfully entitled to possess them;

(c) forthwith give information at the nearest police-station of the loss or theft |
of any arms or ammunition covered by this licence; and !

(d) give prior intimation to the licensing authority concerned of his intention
to break up or dispose of any fire-arms or ammunition or any part thereof
(otherwise than as mentioned in the note below); failing which, proof of
the articles having been broken up or disposed of will have to be furnished
to the satisfaction of the licensing authority.

5. The authority granting or renewing the licence has the right to enquire at any
time during the currency of the licence, whether the weapon for which it has been
granted is still in the possession of the licensee, and may require the production of
the weapon for the purpose of such an enquiry.

6. Where a licence in this Form is granted for the possession of potassium chlorate
by an educational institution the following further conditions shall apply:—

(a) The quantity of chlorate stored should be the minimum required for
laboratory purposes as certified by the head of the institution to the
licensing authority.

(b) The stock of chlorate possessed should be kept in a well-made cupboard |
or almirah under lock and key under the control and supervision of a

[PAGE 42]
The Arms Rules, 1962 67
responsible member of the staff and the place where the chemicals are
kept should be adequately secured.

(c) Accounts of issues and balances of chlorate possessed should be kept and
checked with the actual stock at frequent intervals by a responsible member
of the staff. The account book should be available for inspection on demand
by any Magistrate or any police officer of a rank not below that of
Inspector.

/. Chlorates shall be kept in a building constructed of uninflammable material only
and separated from any dwelling-house, other building, highway, street, public thorough
fare or public place by a distance not less than 100 feet:

Provided that where the total quantity stored does not exceed 100 kg. chlorates may
be kept exclusively in a closed and secured receptacle place in a building used for the
keeping of other articles not being of an explosive ot highly inflammable nature.

8. Sulphur shall not be kept in the same room with saltpetre in the premises specified
in column 5:

Provided that where the quantity of each does not exceed 100 kg. sulphur and saltpetre
can be kept in separate closed receptacles in the same room. .

9. No person shall smoke and no open fires shall be allowed at any time in the
premuses specified in column 5, or in the vicinity of the receptacle mentioned in provisos
to conditions 7 and 8.

10. Where any building used for storage of such materials is fitted with electric
lighting or power, the licensee shall get these installations tested at least once a year ‘
or once during the currency of the licence by an Electrical Inspector appointed under”
the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, '[or if these installations are in Sikkim by an authority
notified in this behalf by the State Government of Sikkim], to ensure that there is no
danger of the fire or sparking.

11. Any accident, fire or explosion occutring within the premises specified in
column 5 which is attended with loss of human life or serious injury to person or
property shall be reported at once by the licensee to the officer-in-charge of the nearest
police station having jurisdiction over the premises as well as to the Inspector of
Explosives of the circle concerned.

Note.—Licensees are warned that in case they sell or transfer any arms or
ammunition covered by the licences possessed by them to any person they shall forthwith
inform in writing the District Magistrate having jurisdiction or the officer-in-charge.
of the nearest police-station of such sale or transfer together with the particulars of
the fire-arms and ammunition and the person to whom they have been sold or transferred
(section 5 of the Arms Act, 1959). Failure to give such information is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine. which may
extend to Rs. 500, or with both [section 25 (3) of the Act].

Sea arrears |
|. Ins. by G.S.R. 1462 (E),-dated 21st July, 1976.

[PAGE 43]
68 | The Arms Rules, 1962
'TFORM Ill
Licence for the acquisition, possession and carrying of arms or
ammunition for sport/protection/display*

I. The fees payable in respect of the initial grant and each subsequent year of grant

_ or renewal of licences in this Form shall be at the rates as shown against
Sl, No. 3 under Schedule IV.

Il. The reduced fees for renewal will ordinarily be available only if application for
renewal is made within one month after the date of expiry of the licence and if
application is not made within that period, the licensing authority may in his discretion.
levy—

(a) full fee as for initial grant of the licence: and

(b) if he is satisfied that the delay is not justifiable or excusable, not serious
enough to warrant revocation of the licence or prosecution of the licensees.
a late fee not exceeding the amount of the licence fee if fee is charged,
or Rs 100 in other cases, unless he considers it not necessary to renew
the licence.

Ill. Where a licence in this Form is granted or renewed for a period exceeding
one year, the fee shall be calculated at the rates prescribed against Sl. No. 3 under
Schedule IV, fractions of a year being reckoned as one whole year for the purpose:

(1) Provided that the fee shall be—

(a) The actual rates prescribed against Sl. No. 3 under Schedule IV for initial
grant in respect of the first year; and
(b) The annual rate prescribed against SI. No. 3 under Schedule IV for renewal
In respect of each year or part thereof beyond the first year,
CR (a ee ee: Becencemmemnrenes wa meee ieee
Serial Name, Arms and ammunition that licensee is Name,
‘No. of description _.___ entitled to possess Mt os *[parent
licence and Brief Quantity & description of name| and
residence = description each kind of ammunition _ address
of licensee of each to be purchase- of
weapon possessed _ able during retainer
with details at any one __ the year (if any)
€.2., time covered
identifica- by the
tion marks, licence
register
number,
etc. Lm.
eee
| 2 3 4 5 6
a
eee
|. Subs. by G.S.R. 1, dated 19th December, 1997 (w.e.f. 3-1-1998).
2. Subs, by G.S.R. 99, dated 14th May, 1998 (w.e.f. 23-5-1998).

[PAGE 44]
The Arms Rules, 1962 69
Arms or ammunition that Area ** Date Date on which the
retainer is entitled to possess __ within on which licence or the arms or
Arms Ammunition which licence both shall be
the expires produced for
licence inspection before
is valid licensing authority
under rule 52 (2)

7 8 9 10 11
ee eereeeeeceneseees
SO

TRC i xccresenivese Wevecsicarses LObescuts Name (in capitals)/Signature
of the licensing authority
PI SSIQMAU OME siisacciccvccciciccnecee:
t PT aC 6 iijcecsonnacooevceavenseicacaas
Or |
(SEAL) Signature of the officer
specially empowered to sign
the licence under rule 4
; Designation.........0cccccccessce,
PROB, cwsvsivscnceestsouscesses
*The inappropriate term(s) should be deleted. The word "Tourist" shall be stamped
across a licence issued under Entry 3 (c) (c) of Schedule II. io
**Provided that where a licence is granted in Form III, IV, V or VI for the
possession of arms to be acquired by the licensee subsequent to the grant of the licence,
the authority granting the licence shall at the time of granting the same, direct that
within a period specified by him in this behalf which he may from time to time extend,
the arms covered by the licence shall be acquired and that the licence or the arms or
both shall be produced for his inspection, and if within the period so specified or
extended the licensee fails to acquire the arms and to produce the licence or the arms
or both, as the case may be, the licence shall cease to be in force.
ee OEE
FORM OF RENEWAL OF THE LICENCE
Dee apd
Date and Date on Name (in Signature and SEAL
year of which Capitals)/ designation of the
renewal renewed Signature and — Officer specially
licence © designation of empowered to
expires the renewing sign the licence
authority under rule 4
eee
Se

[PAGE 45]
70 ? The Arms Rules, 1962
CONDITIONS

1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 and
of the Arms Rules, 1962.

2. It covers only the person named, and the arms or ammunition described therein
and such retainers (if any) as may be entered in column 6:

Provided that if the licensee is a recognised shikar agent in possession of a
certificate to that effect from the Central Government he shall be able to lend his
weapons covered by his licence for use by any foreign tourist accompanying in and
in possession of a shooting licence under the local games rules, valid for the area
where shooting by the latter is intended:

Provided further that the licensee shall be able to lend his weapon temporarily for
a period not exceeding a fortnight for the purpose of sport only to a person lawfully
entitled to possess such type of weapon and subject to the conditions that—

(a) the weapon is used by the borrower in the presence of the licence-holder
or under his written authority, which shall show the number and other
identification marks of the weapon and the period for which it is lent;

(b) in the event of the weapon being misused by or stolen or lost due to the
gross negligence of, the borrower, the licence thereof shall be liable to be
revoked; and .

(c) the borrower shall, on demand, produce proof of such lending.

3. If the licensee is a bona fide foreign tourist the word “TOURIST” shall be
stamped on his licence by the licensing authority.

4. This licence is valid to the extent specified in column 9 subject, in the case
of a licence having effect in any area outside the State in which it is granted or
renewed, to any restrictions which may be imposed in such area by any general or
special order of the Central Government.

5. The licensee or any retainer acting under this licence shall not carry any arms
covered thereby otherwise than in a good faith for the purpose of sport/protection/
display; and, save where he is specially authorised in this behalf by the District
Magistrate concerned, he shall not take any such arms to a fair, religious procession
or other public assemblage (or within the campus or precincts of any educational
institution).

6. The licensee, at the time of purchasing any arms or ammunition shall cause
the following particulars to be endorsed upon his licence under the vendor’s signature,
namely:— |

(a) the name, description and residence of the person, Who takes delivery of
the articles purchased;

(b) the nature and quantity of the articles purchased; and

(c) the date of purchase,

[PAGE 46]
The Arms Rules, 1962 71
and if the arms or ammunition are purchased from any person other than a licensed
dealer, shall also cause the particulars specified in clauses (b) and (c) to be furnished
in writing to the authority who granted this licence within such period as may be
prescribed for this purpose by such authority. No purchase of ammunition shall, however,
be permitted except on a written certificate from the licensee certifying that with the
amount proposed to be purchased the total quantity of ammunition in his possession
will not exceed the maximum which he is entitled to possess at any one time, or his
total allowance for the year.

7. He shall not purchase ammunition of any kind in excess of the maximum which
may from time to time be fixed by the Central Government. Such maximum may be
prescribed both for the amount purchasable in a calendar year and for the amount that
may be possessed at any one time. If, however, a licensee exhausts the total quantity
of ammunition purchasable in a year earlier than the close of the year, he may for
good and sufficient reason be given a temporary increase in the total quantity purchasable
at the discretion of the licensing authority.

8. He shall not possess Government arms and ammunition.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this condition— | :

(a) “Government arms” means a fire-arm or other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and

(b) “Government ammunition” means ammunition manufactured in any
Government factory, or prepared for and supplied to Government other
than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian
use.

9. The licensee shall—

(a) on demand by an authorised officer produce the arms possessed under |
this licence; has

(b) not sell or transfer any arms or ammunition or any part thereof covered
by this licence to any person not lawfully entitled to possess them:

(c) forthwith give information at the nearest police-station of the loss or theft
of any arms or ammunition covered by this licence; and

(d) give prior intimation to the licensing authority concerned of his intention
to break up or dispose of any firm-arms or ammunition or any part thereof
(otherwise than as mentioned in the note below); failing which, proof of
the articles having been broken up or disposed of will have to be furnished
to the satisfaction of the licensing authority.

10. Condition 8 may be cancelled by the authority granting the licence if empowered
to do so by the Central Government, and an endorsement added showing the
Government arms or ammunition which the licensee is authorised to possess.

11. Where the licence is granted for the purpose of sport, the licensee or any
retainer or any foreign tourist or other person referred to in the proviso to condition
2 or any other person using the weapon under the licence shall observe such close

[PAGE 47]
72 The Arms Rules, 1962 |
season as may be prescribed by the State Government concerned in respect of the |
game-birds and animals, |

12, (a) The licensee may, at his option, apply to the nearest licensing authority
having jurisdiction for the renewal of the licence as and when it becomes necessary.

(b) If a person who holds a licence in Form III changes his places of residence,
permanently or temporarily, for more than thirty consecutive days and carries with
him the weapon covered by the licence, to a place other than that indicated in column
2 of the licence, he shall, (within thirty days of such change) send intimation about :
such change to the licensing authority of the place of his new residence as well as
to the authority which granted the licence or last renewed it, as the case may be, and
shall, on demand forthwith produce the licence and the weapon to the first mentioned
authority for making necessary entry in the licence to indicate therein the particulars
of the new residence of the licensee.

13. Without prejudice to the voidance of this licence for breach of any of the
foregoing conditions, it shall be void if—

(a) the licensee dies, or

| (b) any weapon covered thereby—
(i) is sold, or transferred, or
fil) is attached in execution of a decrees:

Provided that where a weapon is sold or transferred the licensing authority may
permit the holder of the licence to acquire a fresh weapon of the same description |
within such period as may be specified by him in this behalf and subject to—

(a) the production of the weapon so acquired or the licence or both before

the aforesaid licensing authority for inspection as required under sub-rule

(2) of rule 52, and |
(b) the payment of the prescribed licence fee in respect of the weapon so

acquired.

14. The authority granting or renewing the licence has the right to enquire
at any time during the currency of the licence, whether the weapon or weapons for
which it has been granted is or are still in the possession of the licensee, and to |
require its or their production for the purpose of such enquiry.

Note 1.—Any breach of the conditions of this licence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to Rs. 2000, or with both (section 30 of the Act).

Note 2.—Licensees are warned that in case they sell or transfer any arms or
ammunition covered by the licences possessed by them to any person, they shall :
forthwith inform in writing to the District Magistrate having jurisdiction or the officerin-charge of the nearest police-station of such sale or transfer together with the
particulars of the fire-arms and ammunition and the person to whom they have been
sold or transferred (section 5 of the Arms Act, 1959). Failure to give such information
is punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extent to Rs. 500, or with both [section 25(3) of the Act].]

[PAGE 48]
The Arms Rules, 1962
' : H =f
gg bss bit dw
gofaas vin Sakae &
e |g5826~ Si ;
a = oe ie! Q |
vom & San > ii 3
Be FOSS #ii 8 |
a aA of oe ah es
= ose e8s sii |
bi ar oz & 3 |
gi bdar tticelfall wg
: gx a a 2a SB yg
: £8 fii Bi [gsge
é S 230 ifn bee & #
s | tsees 2 6d BE
} aches Cctids Bo $= 3] «
g beuas M a z : aE
|! Cr eee:
° : Gy: 5,
“ = dbo 8 ie , — s
2 |23| #85— |v 52: f¢ 6 sn: |
= 23 See go : os J ; | |
& a ae ‘eh 2 |
: g & 83 & os : 5 3
A ES 633 28 : : .
Ss & |33Bl gis Efi Bo las
=] “a a8 8 4 5
é Ske E a3 ¢ =) siSe2.,
E i gee ee. Ya Su |
s Big5as 21 a32 oa
fs HS EREZ 5 bs 5 P
a@ = E 2
2 2| 2% Q
3 ‘ ane eS
E I Ag ne
bu 3 25 3
3 : ite
a= | wo i
F 2 B — .
£ BSas 3 +
% & 8S ay 5 8 335
£8 » Doo 4B
ce) ; : ae — Oe ER & 2
= : sy &. ~N a2
a 73, 8 o 2 5 Bees
=| Ba : 23 gee
88s 2 A :
E B32 3 ' ReRs
A Yo : s: F
aoe 3 || s22¢
: a i MF tee cole
Tet 33S
: | seer
: : 7 pd pe %
e eeo,e28 , 3 a err
S |oeheguae? 3 gS 8] - zOG?
S P=
peed 56 Boz 6 =~ B : 2 ce
gedebec dels : : yee:
SeggEs sa 83 be a 22d
“=o Oo + = re
. Ouacet
mm oben ct
* s0usoy'] JO ‘ON “d0§ | — |

[PAGE 49]
i
74 The Arms Rules, 1962
CONDITIONS |
1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, and |
of the Arms Rules, 1962.
. 2. If covers only the person named in column 3 of this licence and the arms or
ammunition described in columns 5 and 6.
3. This licence is valid to the extent specified in column 7, subject in the case
of a licence having effect in an area outside the State in which it is granted, or renewed, |
to any restrictions which may be imposed in such area by any general or special order |
of the Central Government. '
(3A. A licensee having an arms licence valid throughout India, who carries the
licensed weapon or weapons to any place outside the State where he normally resides, |
shall. within 48 hours of his arrival at such place, intimate in writing to the officer |
in charge of the police station or the Superintendent of Police having jurisdiction over |
that place the fact of his arrival at that place and the particulars of any such weapon. |
4. This licence shall only be granted to a person nominated in that behalf and
certified to be his own retainer by a person exempted under section 41 of the Act, and
it shall only be granted in respect of the arms or ammunition specified in this behalf
by, and being the property of, such exempted person.
5. The grant/renewal of this licence is subject to the condition that it shall expire
on the date on which the person specified in column 2 of this licence ceases to be |
exempted under section 41 of the Act where such date is earlier than the date on |
_ which it would otherwise expire in the normal course. |
6. The licensee shall not carry any arms covered by this licence otherwise than |
in good faith for the purpose of sport/protection/display; and save where he is specially |
authorised in this behalf by the District Magistrate concerned, he shall not take any |
such arms to a fair, religious procession or other public assemblage *[or within the |
campus or precincts of any educational institution]. |
7, The authority granting or renewing the licence has the right to enquire at any
time during the currency of the licence, whether the weapon for which it has been
granted is still in the possession of the licensee and to require its production for the
purposes of such enquiry. ]
| Note.—Any breach of the condition of this licence is punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to
Rs. 500 or with both (section 30 of the Act). |
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 52(E), dated 24th January, 1989 (w.e.f. 24-1-1989) and subs. by G.S.R. 404 (B),
dated 28th March, 1990 (w.e.f. 28-3-1990). |
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 1259, dated 27th November, 1980. |

[PAGE 50]
The Arms Rules, 1962 75
FORM HIB.
. Permit |

Shin. cccccccccecceseccevessSOM Of sescssesssvesssesessee-Village/tOWD.....0..e0e GISUICE... creeds hereby

appointed to be an armed retainer of the company entitling him to possess, carry and use,
for all lawful orders, issued by me as a representative of the company, the following arms
or ammunition covered by the said licence:—
nn
Arms Ammunition

nnn ncuron a
nnn rnrennernrnneennnn as
STi... ccccccecececesseeerseeeseeeeeeetust carry this permit with him when carrying the arms or
ammunition; he shall not carry the arms or ammunition to an area not covered by the —
licence. val
Signature... si ss re Holder of licence... m7 Me tes |
Designation es 7 z No... = i"
and full address ... - ra Valid for the period... se bes
of the Company ... Ma 8 |
Signature or Thumb-impression and ;
identification marks of the retainer.

[PAGE 51]
76 The Arms Rules, 1962
' f] ® e.= 2 e
OO hy ‘ F ; tet
By SFEER wry PE gees
es SRS R8S5ENTS ‘a ae a2 oO
6 3 55 = f $f $ gees
o YY "ss Govt wa | ~— : : e on
So & ae = gq a, ae a 9 Oo
see a : : : 228 «
: ' : ‘ual
a , a : ; iediag -
" : . 4 —
si8aseeus L.£ 4 Soo e
a8e 35% <2 BS ae: oe OE wy
aes o2 Y eal te ; : : net “ Oo
k4 = Oo 2 — & bacd ‘ : r A >
‘i SoSE Se2=54 = ' : : Sos oa
¢ | RgPegesege s ap Boe
B FSS S255 & rr a meer ee
a = ' ; — of
: i)
B is i i Bee
“A 2 ee a(t ; : <3 3S wo
a Be 8 = i Peo
Sy | 32 ei: i gare
= = = i a i
= “A : : 0 ©
S a es : : vf Oo #
=Y > $ F } SES es
oe =| a : : ‘ ‘ S=oes
gs ovo 2 wo. a a a: | zo
5 SSEE Deo foe. ¢ #28 &
Bw 3 e > BD a ~ ae : : S 2 &
Fe] 2280883 = foc 68. — So
<9 9S Gar ogs ; S&S | | Saas
yO | RSS 85 1 e-2- + Gees
2a | 7 : 6 i gx
a & > 60 +s ‘a ae &
Eg —~ © @ :$ &8 B'S
9 e Bu SG En &
< mt . 2 4 3 Ss % o a4 Gg O
jem OQ “9 o * o”“" 4 @
c= 7) no 8 «4 ‘ae
- OSG 8 “ ~ mw OO A ying &
bo = Pa 8 & S28 as
Ai a aS .g oo bn em GS
© | y =
frig Ws > ee 2B
y7 © 5S 42 OY uy
So a Es 2 Oy 2 0
a = oon oo & + v a
ZF s Hees [< 2s >igea
Ls | [ — = P]
aw C = 3 i ow FE -~o" DO O
a os a” GH weer = oo ov
. na & ‘= © cat w oe — a
bas a oa | N co E* 38s
=] =] saa] on w : BS vue
me ES = = = a) aPetooso
—- ba a | b= | ‘ a & es .
“aoe & Se Exs : wy wr. r o Y5 6 ei
35 5 o sg4 — | ~oF 58 re
Es >o £82 a S Be Sessa q =
a ‘ot stan
Ss |= #8 Hee eos 88.8 re
< a S gs a > | 2 ee B= 822 2
te a -& Z2S gigs weeks aod # , 80
° & Oo : = mS o & =]
e < rn 9g Sw G
5 | Se geses
= bos - Sh ; BES FES ge 3
Bas “5 x : so 8 3
a. :
US S685 GF a SOE a 2 <
SeaeGdSa-s HD «
ODD hs & 4 ~ J 5 i recat
Te ee = : aals 9 S
SS ER cx
ce % we gfe: “
° : Oe eel [al *
cs #28 : zak * g ©
EGE se = aoe § > B
ataso = . mo 8 a ;
Ar ; ogo & 4
a ww oo 2 8 :

[PAGE 52]
The Arms Rules, 1962 WW
: FORM OF RENEWAL OF THE LICENCE
Date and Date on which '[Name (in captial)/
year of renewal of licence Signature and designation Seal
renewal expires of renewing authority]
| 2 3 4
a
a
CONDITIONS

1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 and
of the Arms Rules, 1962.

2. Once, every year between the 15th November and 31st December, the licensee
shall produce this licence and every weapon covered thereby before the Magistrate
referred to in column 8. .

3. He shall not keet Government arms or ammunition.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this condition —

(a) “Government arm” means a fire-arm or other weapon which is property
of the Government; and

(b) “Government ammunition” means ammunition manufactured. in ‘any
Government factory, or prepared for and supplied to Government, other
than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian
use,

4. He shall not carry any arms covered by this licence otherwise than in good
faith for the destruction of wild animals which do injury to human beings or cattle,
nor shall he take any such arms to a fair, religious procession or other public assemblage =.
or to any considerable distance beyond the place or area entered in column 5: ii

*{Provided that save where he is specially authorised in this behalf by the District
Magistrate concerned, the licensee shall not catry arms covered by the licence within the
Campus or precincts of any educational institution. ] .

5. Condition 3 may be cancelled by the authority granting the licence if empowered
to do so by the Central Government and an endorsement added showing the Government
arms Or ammunition which the licensee is entitled to possess.

6. He shall not purchase or possess ammunition of any kind in excess of the
maximum allowed under columns 3 and 4 of the licence or of the maximum which
may from time to time be fixed by the Central Government for the amount purchasable
in a year and for the amount that may be possessed at any one time.

7. At the time of purchasing any arms or ammunition he shall cause the following
particulars to be endorsed upon his licence under the vendor’s signature, namely:—

(a) the name, description and residence of the person who takes delivery of

the articles purchased,

(b) the nature and quantity of the ariticles purchased: and

(c) the date of puchase,
and if the arms are purchased from any person other than a licensed dealer he shal]
also cause the particulars specified in clauses (b) and (c) to be furnished in writing
i lc
|. Subs. by G.S.R. 1011(A), dated 7th August, 1972.
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 1259, dated 27th November, 1980.

[PAGE 53]
78 The Arms Rules, 1962 ;
to the authority who granted this licence within such period as may be prescribed for this |
purpose by such authority. No purchase of ammunition shall, however, be permitted except
on a written certificate from the licensee certifying that with the amount proposed to be
purchased the total quantity of ammunition in his possession will not exceed the maximum |
which he is entitled to possess at any one time, or his total allowance for the year. !

8. Without prejudice to the voidance of this licence for breach of any of the foregoing

conditions, it shall be void if—
(a) the licensee dies, or
(b) any weapon covered thereby— |
(i) is sold or transferred, or
(ii) is attached in execution of a decree:

‘(Provided that where a weapon is sold or transferred, the licensing authority may
permit the holder of the licence to acquire a fresh weapon of the same description |
within such period as may be specified by him in this behalf and subject to—

(a) the production of the weapon so acquired or the licence or both before
the aforesaid licensing authority for inspection as required under sub-rule
(2) of rule 52; and . |
(b) the payment of the prescribed licence fee in respect of the weapon so t
acquired. | !

9, The authority granting or renewing the licence has the nght to enquire at any
time during the currency of the licence whether any weapon for which it has been
granted is still in the possession of the licensee and to require the production of the :
weapons for the purposes of such enquiry. | :

10. The licensee shall—

(a) on demand by the licensing authority or authorised officer produce the f
weapon covered by this licence; |
(b) not sell or transfer any arms or ammunition or any part thereof covered
by this licence to any person not fully entitled to possess them, |
(c) forthwith give information at the nearest police-station of the loss or theft |
of any arms or ammunition covered by this licence; and |
(d) give prior intimation to the licensing authority concern of his intention
to break up or dispose of any arms or ammunition or any part thereof :
(otherwise than as mentioned) in note below; failing which proof of the :
articles having been broken up or disposed of will have to be furnished
to the satisfaction of the licensing authority.

Note 1.—Any breach of the conditions of this licence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may |
extend to Rs. 500, or with both (section 30 of the Act). |

Note 2.—Licensees are warned that in case they sell or transfer any arms or
ammunition covered by the licences possessed by them to any person, they shall |
forthwith inform in writing the District Magistrate having jurisdiction or the officer- |
in-charge of the nearest police station, of such sale or transfer, together with the particulars
of the fire-arms and ammunition and the person to whom they hfive been sold or transferred |
(section 5 of the Arms Act, 1959). Failure to give such information is punishable with |
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to Rs. 500, or with both [section 25(3) of the Act.]
|. Ins. by G.S.R. 9, dated 14th December, 1968. |

[PAGE 54]
The Arms Rules, 1962 79
(Z)ZS 9[NI Japun 822 ¥
Ayuoy ne Bursusst] Oy) = E = 3
Re ee
a10J9q UOTIOSdSUI JOJ 2309 7)
: 90 oo
poonpoid aq jTeYs yI0q Sue
ie
JO SUWLIB OY) 20 90UDDT] 2 2 @ =
QO
a) _
A | oui YoIyM uo a1eq me a A
3 a ans eS 2S
a ae 3.6. >
bee eS 8 Sia 2 2 2
- S28 SESE S
wn me 8 = = oo
a¥ mc og a od rm
O's 2 Be fo J
© nf od aay a os)
feat ge & 2 c
~ oo 4 © ny a 3
=| Oo 5 OS
2 a6 9 Gy Og =
5 a Be Pot CG. Bis 2
2 oc. 3 = of Dye ee gS ts
o S2as aw 8 a 5
a a 2 4 > Q Pi —
ae cs
Cs 4 > 3; ¢ 6 we g c
Tow eee SiS ‘ , : uSa se Ww =
& 3 Saf SE eo OLS .
o = ee: = o So Z :
= BE|/ Sos : whrett 6 rs ae
ra ‘a § > ee 5 aS fen os lap, Cee nal 3
5 G & ao = > J 2 Oo 4 |
a 6 & = FESS He
= ~Slonu 2 SSeS ge
Ue | oOo oa ee) Pa Ob .
& & oO “” a4 meso § 2 fy | we
=e 4 OF Y a Ba 8 s‘d oY
a 5 = ac » Ese eo SF
in Salis Sus EORo 6% 2°59 aa
oO <S Oo ri ooo 8S hw o 2 or
ve id GHA. & ao 4! 8 a.
i S| a SS28 wl ez a .
by ar a © So Qn a> ll he
Be Ca = Se les ;
Y co lu = ‘3 oO S ely) She
3 = |©°’3 93 a. cof sega S e
a =I api a Se = 5506 O = >
ae |S30 EY “2 gs es 5 [i =
cs a. |o == = o oS ~
| ‘ oS os : 6 ts § 35 = a)
‘g 3 |/530 8 ie Ys on ed 2 EA
4 ce |27 83 fi : a2 5 54 2 a
LP} a : = = ad *
© tot, te ht : oS 57 a 2
ou & O gs bb V : sesnu~ 2)
r- es |e eouss da 33S > a= E
& <tsim#sméoegd Ho & a = hs !
“i i S aeee & ©
‘ 5 ee 6 S ‘— 8 2 Y 5 m
=| tes > & am @ 858 s ce) =
os ae Oo a) : =e oO oO = =~
r-| oO “oS 832 3 o9 >uas Q a
bo a2 os o & a : Se 8 oo 2
a oo 2 De o : oo 2 a Ss o
ae) EeEPas ee = : ice oO ra
Te pi | oOo a I oO 1 Paw r
3 6) pees = a o ba = — i
un gee Of 2 «= ° =a CL BS ae yen
g go." 5 8 8 - 3 2 oe =
Coal wn pe = : | ‘
3 oe sees se 6 SE 2 Y “
? — cco evr — : Fi ra a
Epa ec gba s : g23e5 ({s 9
Zeno ote sas 22822 ‘d &
&&Be8 her
a S63 8 S FE
* =
: QISUdIT] JO DDUDPISOI | 22 iE: 2 5
é i ‘
pa pue uondosap ‘auey] BES OQ ri

[PAGE 55]
80 The Arms Rules, 1962
CONDITIONS

'[l. The licence is granted subject to—

(a) the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, and of the Arms Rules, 1962, and

(b) the provisions of sections 11 and 39 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act,

1972, or other relevant sections, as the case may be, in respect of the
States and Union Territory where the said Act is applicable.]

2. The licensee shall not carry any arms covered by this licence otherwise than
in good faith for the destruction of wild animals which do injury to crops or cattle,
nor shall he take any such arms to a fair, religious procession or other public assemblage
or any considerable distance beyond the place or area entered in column 6:

‘[Provided that save where he is specially authorised in this behalf by the District
Magistrate concerned, the licensee shall not carry arms covered by the licence within
the campus or precincts of any educational institution.]

3. He shall not lend any arms or ammunition covered by this licence to any person,
other than a member of his family or servant who may be employed by. the licensee
to protect the crops or cattle situated in the area specified in the licence and who is
mentioned in column 2 of the licence.

. 4. The licensee shall—

(a) on demand by an authorised officer produce the weapons covered by this

licence;

(b) not sell or transfer any arms or ammunition or any part thereof covered

by this licence to any person not lawfully entitled to possess then;

(c) forthwith give information at the nearest police station of the loss or theft

of any arms or ammunition covered by his licence; and

(d) give prior intimation to the licensing authority concerned of his intention

to break up or dispose of any arms or ammunition or any part thereof
[otherwise than as mentioned in (b) above]; failing which proof of the
articles having been broken up or disposed of will have to be furnished
to the satisfaction of the licensing authority.

5. He shall not keep Government arms or ammunition.

Explanation—For the purpose of this condition—

(a) “Government arms” means a fire-arm or other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and |

(b) “Government ammunition” means ammunition manufactured in any

Government factory, or prepared for and supplied to Government other
than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian
use,

6. Condition 5 may be cancelled by the authority granting the licence if empowered
to do so by the Central Government, and an endorsement added showing the
Government arms and ammunition which the licensee is entitled to possess.

7. He shall not purchase or possess ammunition of any kind in excess of the
maximum allowed under columns 3 and 4 of the licence or of the maximum which
may from time to time be fixed by the Central Government for the amount purchasable
in a year and for the amount that may be possessed at any one time.

| 8. At the time of purchasing any arms or ammunition he shall cause the
following in particulars to be endorsed upon his licence under the vendor’s signature,
hamely:— \
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 509, dated 26th May, 1982.
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 1259, dated 27th November, 1980.

[PAGE 56]
The Arms Rules, 1962 81
(a) the name, description and residence of the person who takes
delivery of the articles purchased;
(b) the nature and quantity of the articles purchased; and
(c) the date of purchase,
and if the arms are purchased from any person other than a licensed dealer, he shall also
cause the particulars specified in clauses (b) and (c) to be furnished in writing to the
authority who granted this licence within such period as may be prescribed for this purpose
by such authority. No purchase of ammunition shall, however, be permitted except on a
written certificate from the licensee certifying that with the amount proposed to be purchased
the total quantity of ammunition in his possession will not exceed the maximum which he
is entitled to possess at any one time, or his total allowance for the year.
9. Without prejudice to the voidance of this licence for breach of any of the
foregoing conditions, it shall be void if—
(a) the licensee dies, or |
(b) any weapon covered thereby— .
(i) is sold or transferred, or
(ii) is attached in execution of a decree:

[Provided that where a weapon is sold or transferred, the licensing authority may
permit the holder of the licence to acquire a fresh weapon of the same description
within such period as may be specified by him in this behalf and subject. to—

(a) the production of the weapon so acquired or the licence or both
before the aforesaid licensing authority for inspection as required
under sub-rule (2) of rule 52, and i

(b) the payment of the prescribed licence fee in respect of the weapon
so acquired. ]

10. The authority granting or renewing the licence has the right to enquiry at any
time during the currency of the licence, whether any weapon for which it has been
granted is still in the possession of the licensee and to require the production of the ees
weapon for the purpose of such enquiry. m4

11. Where, after the end of any harvest season, the State Government considers
it expedient that for the protection of wild life in any area, any fire-arm or ammunition
licensed in this form should be deposited in a police station or with a licensed dealer,
it may, by order, require any licensee to do deposit such fire-arms or ammunition for
such period as the arm are not required for protection of crops or cattle and as may
be specified therein, and thereupon the licensee shall be bound to comply with such
order.

Note 1.—Any breach of the condition of this licence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may
extend to Rs. 500, or with both (section 30 of the Act).

Note 2.—Licensee are warned that in case they sell or transfer any arms or
ammunition covered by the licences possessed by them to any person they shall forthwith
inform in writing the District Magistrate having jurisdiction or the officer-in-charge
of the nearest police station, of such sale or transfer, together with the particulars of the
fire-arms and ammunition and the person to whom they have been sold or transferred
(section 5 of the Arms Act, 1959). Failure to give such information is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend
to Rs. 500, or with both, *[section 25(3) of the Act].

I. Ins. by G.S.R. 4, dated 19th December, 1968. .
2. Subs. by G.S.R. 4, dated 19th December, 1968.

[PAGE 57]
82 The Arms Rules, 1962
0 cd ba
o & ae)
S B= Sw ef B=
— Lal
po oo On O ; a mS oy
; = Lr =, ' . a ° os = <
E ows 82 3s ~~ : 3 —~e Ve 8
6° - Fe 2
ee eee ', €,23333
por » « a
bee = On = 7 i’ B&B os wef J is
° S&novss 3 oo Ue
7 a SE 26 3 eo wo? = »
= cgut ® = Seog e
= » 2 : a 3 &E& oo
i 2s 2 . Oo : a% fo
a s+ a 3 =< a a
ra aa ee
Kaen C) _ o a © Oo w
c
z sa e¢ a; © : S28 so
= Bo of ms % og om
few moO 9 A © ob o Es 6 Se
os om OO = = - pe 2 &
i Oa = a We
@ a oa re Ww ~~ >
en o ee jo. 2s &
= : oS 5 SES o
a — oN fs = Z° 8 eS
= = og a a> “4 Oo 0 = wg
o FeO st oO! >: GL8¢9
ey o2 6 s Ww ie = >} @8 .44
c. Ow 9 nd ass uss
ry ae mr 2 foe & 4,
bp os o. wine SS
= i= veo oO ee
a ‘eg oh HF OS Bw 2 2
ie a — ix Gy eed
p> 90 — a) Sséeaé
2 C28 Ss e S97 2
68 aa § ha PP > ver 2s
re —_ : ' f o
ry Es Exe os wo FMS | _~
= «= a4 co So, "28 4 ee
5 — es CS eporebys a
sans i Cj 6 6 ae wei
Sas oS ww Ema 8 ob & ob a
. EE SeaGa ieeze &
s GE nM aa aoe) Sno ae ma a
; = 6 o wo
ye So me fe & =“ 6800 5 Sn
a=] to ae Suv OBe= 3 RE
= ac a | ~ S 9's © acc
& = 2 gy oo on .™, so: % _
fo wi : 6h oO wm 4
2 > Eas : ears * Sb
7) <= ww mo a 28 So 2
o Ss ° —) OG & S
wn tu Y © eles
on ae °% s wn ~
e : —~=ecorcty, 8 Rs
S gO OB: ae
<mn : 5» = Gayo bg
dead : Vow _— all
— o§ Cs ° : 1 af a
- a ~ 3 2 la ad
a a o = 8 oS - yo oO ms oe
2 GSS 4 oS ry . ape eg =
the a & 9 © “ ~~ fo Oo Oo
=) 7 se SE oe : gy oY s : i
a ) a a 2m = Ow
a : ic or eet a > rs
a ; > Bot & a an
q@ om o : SS Fa og 2%
* aoe ae ) oo bed sy
Be oz? 8 aenes |
% Ww ont = Ooo Dt On

[PAGE 58]
The Arms Rules, 1962 83
FORM OF RENEWAL OF THE LICENCE
ne nnn ne EE yenEEEES anny an
Date and Date on which '[Name (in capital)/ [Signature and = Seal
year of renewed licence signature and desig- designation of the

renewal expires nation of renewing _ officer specially

authority | empowered to sign

the licence under

rule 4]
ean eer
| 2 3 4 5
anne nan nr nuvi
an
CONDITIONS

1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 and
of the Arms Rules, 1962.

2. It covers only the mess, club or association named and the arms and ammunition »
described therein.

312A. Save where he is specially authorised in this behalf by the District Magistrate
concerned, the licensee shall not carry any arms covered by the licence within the
campus or precincts of any educational institution]. . acre

3. The licencee shall, at the time of purchasing arms or ammunition cause the
following particulars to be endorsed upon his licence under the vendor's signature,
namely:—

| (a) the name, description and residence of the person, who takes delivery of
the articles purchased on behalf of the mess, club or association; e
(b) the nature and quantity of the articles purchased; and
(c) the date of pruchase,
and if the arms or ammunition are purchased from any person other than a licensed
dealer, shall also cause the particulars specified in clauses (b) and (c) to be furnished,
in writing, to the authority who granted this licence within such period as may be
prescribed by that authority for this purpose. No purchase of ammunition shall, however,
be permitted except on a written certificate from the licensee certifying that with the
amount proposed to be purchased the total quantity of ammunition in his possession
will not exceed the maximum which he is entitled to possess at any one time or his
total allowance for the year.

4. The mess, club or association shall not purchase or possess ammunition in
excess of the quantities allowed under columns 2 and 4 of the licence or the maximum
which may from time to time be fixed by the Central Government for the amount
purchasable in a year and for the amount that may be possessed at any one time.
SSE erat
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 1011 (A), dated 7th August, 1972.

2. Added by G.S.R. 1011 (A), dated 7th August, 1972. )
3. Ins. by G.S.R. 1259, dated 13th December, 1980.

[PAGE 59]
84 The Arms Rules, 1962
5. The mess, club of association shall—

(a) on demand by authorised officer produce the weapons covered by this
licence;

(b) not sell or transfer any arms or ammunition or any part thereof covered
by this licence to any person not lawfully entitled to possess them;

(c) forthwith give information at the nearest police-station of the loss theft
of any arms or ammunition covered by this licence; and

(d) give prior intimation to the licensing authority concerned of its intention
to break up or dispose of any arms or ammunition or any part thereof
(otherwise than as mentioned in note below); failing which proof the
articles having been broken up or disposed of will have to be furnished
to the satisfaction of the licensing authority.

6. The licence does not authorise any member of the mess, club or association to
keep Government arms or ammunition,

Explanation.—For the purpose of this condition—

(a) “Government arms” means a fire-arm or other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and

(b) “Government ammunition” means ammunition manufactured in a
Government factory, or prepared for and supplied to Government, other
than such ammunition as released by Government for civilian use.

7. The Central Government or the State Government or in the State of '[Tamil
Nadu], Andhra Pradesh or Kerala, the Board of Revenue, may require any fire-arms
or ammunition possessed by the mess, club or association to be registered in such
manner as the Central Government or the State Government or the Board of revenue
may think fit.

| 8. The authority granting or renewing the licence has the right to enquire at any
time during the currency of the licence whether the weapons for which it has been
granted are still in the possession of the mess, club or association and to require the
production of such weapons for the purposes of such enquiry.

Note.—Licensees are warned that in case they sell or transfer any arms or
ammunition covered by the licences possessed by them to any person they shall forthwith
inform in writing to the District Magistrate having jurisdiction or the officer-in-charge
of the nearest police station, of such sale or transfer together with the particulars of the
fire-arms and ammunition and the person to whom they have been sold or transferred
(section 5 of the Arms Act, 1959). Failure to give such informations is punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, which
may extend to Rs. 500, or with both, [section 25 (3) of the Act].

1. Previously, "Madras".

[PAGE 60]
The Arms Rules, 1962 85
PBA S! Qou90T] oy] ~ ays ¢ ay 4
yoIyM Joy pouag | ~ ae Pf 3
Adnooo io oo
03 Ayayty st Aaurnol| © 2s i ob
oy} YOTyM porlag bj i
uoneUnsep : 3 PPG
i] o : 2 GS
= JO 90v]{d pure ojno1| & S 7 = 3
i= ainqiedap jo o0RIg a 3 an:
ao o* 7 ie
Pe c a >, + - is
is deol =) airs : ; ;
—¥ sh ce 2% 4
a oO H : H
“ Z ao a
= —! 4 : 4
bs PSSeS. rid
a ben : : iH
> i. | caso 2S ~ i oii
Ke a het > | :
oO =I oa a
© =) In ‘oe fi
si]; 8. 8 acai |
~ | Bo eo. 6 3
£ |£| 328 ? Bee
bs, r) o.
> o < 2 aad : A
gq |o Os 8
w
> — > at 5
@ = 7. Om 2 ai
= oo -— SS a
Sg fe : : 2
m& § |§ R
= ci a @ et ES ee .
e 6s a 0's t 7a
s | |2z 3 a oa
SI me i. rey
o
LS) . =z
5 cig
~ S
vz) - XA
Ele |gcss 3 2 5
es |e ‘So SA Ss ae, ad Da
; a — oN
we |S AI> Bs o>
Be IT EIOg os As
~
8 65 : a=
& lo 2 2 &
a eS oes QI a a
— oO}; & ; 3
= |en]/68 .v 23
I Sis Op OD S : a 2
Y |Eelaen 5s : =
a g o 5 ONE OG site = *.
od artoRg 2s iz
7 @eoVg aga |S : mo
fs) Gooey tHE : A po
o o's gy oY ° OM
5 Gee oe OS > O45
(Aue jr) He
: juoBe pue sosucoly | _ a
»| 97 JO s0uapisar pue F ES
fs uoldiosop ‘owen ca vie
b ~ A

[PAGE 61]
86 The Arms Rules, 1962
1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 and of :

the Arms Rules, 1962. |
2. It covers only the persons named, and the arms or ammunition described therein |

| and such retainers (if amy) as may be entered in column 4.
| 3, The licensee or any retainer acting under this licence shall not, unless specially |
empowered in this behalf by the authority granting the licence, carry any arms to a |
; fair, religious procession or other public assemblage, '[or within the campus or precincts |
of any educational institution].
4. He shall not carry Government arms or ammunition.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this condition—

;

(a) “Government arms” means a fire-arm of other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and

(b) “Government ammunition” means ammunition manufactured in any |
Government factory, or prepared for and supplied to the Government other |

than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian |

use.

5. He shall—

(a) on demand by any authorised officer produce the weapons covered by this :

licence; and

(b) forthwith give information at the nearest police-station of the loss or theft |

of any arms or ammunition covered by the licence. |

Note 1.—Any breach of the conditions of this licence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend |
to Rs. 2000, or with both (section 30 of Act).
Note 2.—Licensees are warned that in case they sell or transfer any arms or ammunition |
covered by the licence possessed by them to any person they shall forthwith inform in :
writing to the District Magistrate having jurisdiction or the officer-in-charge of the nearest
police station, of such sale or transfer, together with the particulars of the arms or
ammunition and the person to whom they have been sold or transferred (section 5 of the
Arms Act, 1959). Failure to give such information is punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to Rs. 500, or with
both '[section 25 (3) of the Act]. Jain ES |
|

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 1259, dated 27th November, 1980.
E

[PAGE 62]
The Arms Rules, 1962 87
© g : an _)
-, am .- oO eee a <
ms = : i - tn)
os = 4 gb i
= ae wy : a
5 29 PEG
= rn a pg i
— 2 ov = a
& == a ee
= oO £ ee =
treet Oo of iS)
ad S : E o- 4 2
c & Po i 3 cb
~ : f &: & oo
ss 5 eb a $3
ee ye & ' . § : 3 a
3 & i Magar cP) yo og of
on <= = rf if of)
o 2 5 pb es
2 © mam ‘yo S yo aS
or a oS a] m : 3 fu)
= |x 3g 3 Bal vg
5 ai “= Be 3 6
BJ . 8 @
a ek os
& = Sif Sp Oo
a ow - rs] os 2 koe 3 wy
S bed am op a. SC:
Stee rer c
=o = rs Geo Ww Z
~ a ° =o oon o
E¢ o = we mim ve & o oO -
Es ‘= go © . ~ oO
— —_— — «]
_— ha eo ee o 5 - oO
—— = o S/o oOo Ce to =
> o ww DU o ¢< S 8 Git
ee |25|b% oe 2/23].
Zee |25\s ES <laef| <
- a aals a = |'o 5 eo
So 2s 2als et toe Sis =
do ey ae 8 = =<
= S's = &. a na Ml eg moe
= = a's ow .7#
cb = 9 2 Ss IH | w 3
a swat *
2 he te ‘Ss: =e E;
oS S 126 fo) 3
a © rt 2 s s fle a
ww = =~ o ; _
a a = 3 5 O 4 .
26 35 A S| s
et ty OS cl H
< @ 2° 3 °
= Sa <2 oO
= © ma ° as a
st -
Ss bt 2
o & c Sag =
a o : © rr)
Se =. * 3 cc Bi
i 0 , 8 = 0%,
a Qg wv fs o —_
: g 2 gs 5 :
oy uu a 3 =
al a ao © s ~
= S = = > tes bf ~
a ws i vo
= zs 5 2
a Ps =
- + a
e 5 .|3 S
ae la is;

[PAGE 63]
88 The Arms Rules, 1962
| CONDITIONS |
1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, and
of the Arms Rules, 1962. |
2. It covers only the person named, and the arms or ammunition described therein.
3. The licensee shall not, unless specially empowered in this behalf by the authority |
granting the licence, carry arms or ammunition to a fair, religious procession or other |
public assemblage '[or within the campus or precincts of any educational institution.]
4. He shall not carry Government arms or ammunition.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this condition—
(a) “Government arms” means a fire-arm or other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and |
(b) “Government ammunition” means ammunition manufactured in any |
Government factory, or prepared for and supplied to the Government other
than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian |
use. |
5. Condition 4 may be cancelled by the authority granting the licence if empowered
to do so by the Central Government and an endorsement added showing the Government
arms or ammunition which the licensee is authorised to possess. |
6. He shall— |
(a) on demand by an authorised officer produce the weapons covered by this |
licence; |
*[(b) not sell, or transfer any arms or ammunition or any part thereof covered
by this licence to any person not lawfully entitled to possess them, and]
(c) forthwith gives information at the nearest police-station of the loss or
theft of any arms or ammunition covered by this licence. |
7. The licensee shall, on arrival at his destination, forthwith apply to the nearest |
licensing authority for a licence in Form II or Form III, as the case may be, in respect
of the arms or ammunition described herein and shall at the same time deliver this
licence in original to that authority. |
Note 1.—Any breach of the conditions of this licence is punishable with :
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend
to Rs. 2,000, or with both (section 30 of the Act). :
Note 2.—Licensees are warned that in case they sell or transfer any arms or |
ammunition covered by the licences possessed by them to any person they shall forthwith
inform in writing to the District Magistrate having jurisdiction or the officer-in-charge |
of the nearest police station, of such sale or transfer, together with the particulars of the
fire-arms or ammunition and the person to whom they have been sold or transferred |
(section 5 of the Arms Act, 1959). Failure to give such information is punishable with :
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may |
extend to Rs. 500, or with both [section 25 (3) of the Act]. |
1. Ins. by G.S.R. 1259, dated 27th November, 1980. |
2. Subs. by S.O. 1283, dated 3rd May, 1963.

[PAGE 64]
The Arms Rules, 1962 89
a v Roig 2 4
‘= esses jk og
=| aq © = a -_ & ._ -@
% Fes ON : ore: eg
= Sea o & Pegg
os S225 5 a Poo3 3
— i = a oop “@ §
‘ ee pial
he hey é rr ee |
~ v 2 pig ag =
a mal foi fF ;
5 cof eo Oe = oe a
ome oo & op 2 0 o hw &
Ww a) ' _ of '
i ta SS Benue
=| ~ a ia eas ts
© ie “a ee ae =
te =. a
e | S8e "3 oan :
shea: — ee ee eee —
Ba Ser eoZ@evecayt oka ec Se ey
na clnox™ » = co bt te
= I 7) 8 i cone I a sh 2
co 3 a a a son oie
s ao] oS ae eee nS
<r .< 3 6 @O ff fs 2
c Say : ; 3
@ ed s os Sey oe, 8 1} c=
- = jd Oo ® ae =
on a Go fe ‘© ui ®
pa Oo os fe F FE = ig =
hon + _ : " # i. dos
oa a 5 AUR ef =
a oO | b Oia eee : Bw Lee.
2 - orFPaesaeim |”
: ,| 3S er2 e 2 ase gy a
Cent u gy 8 5 + — oe ,
Si VY fa i) 3 Fo ea) i ‘
wi 2 ue +e SOTO A ;
c = bm O a ae
ws ma a =
tee = oy
as - = , a & 5
= ia | 1 ba a Sm ae
s © clases 0 aE 2
od CP) o. iil
= a oO im m 1s :
as 6S S| ees e 8 3 ={8 | es
= cd na * _
ea = a|8°¢s st S wy |o a
Hf “Be oo o Wo Se Z. oo : “4
bent t) 0 wv a est (1) > ——
1 A = : od ae s (8|e8% = Sei ¢
et . é
2 [| = Pa So -: i. 1p be Seas
ja ror = :
a4 Cnet : oe ™ -~)
s cu RS ees 48 as
% ee Ss - Hoe a DE
2 SB eu ~ ie
° = = bb
ao e Q
wn o <=
re 7 a : : at
fan . Ls
= &3u-s oO : a
= & S& § 6 x a — 2
e ae = o 9
i. em o7™Ve Ye ua al oO Qo ~
be go” 8 wo . : cS a Be
-3 ga" 2 ae = : = mee
es EY O'S bh Po f —a qa Gus co * a a :
86 |S85es . i z ~S
“i = ed no
sy Ske o oH O -
~ © © : oe tes O &
2 «# * : os >
ot 5 E Boe, & a «3 SO
yee! ee - oo a ; : a Oo >
o a ol
CF) = oO : Sy S
FOS os [7 = . cs ‘a
FEO SO & : ; a =o
eo = 6% © oP ~ — C> 4
— Nee 2 & = Rr ic ee’

[PAGE 65]
90 The Arms Rules, 1962 |
CONDITIONS
|. (a) This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 |
and of the Arms Rules, 1962.
(b) This licence does not entitle the dealer to take any arms or ammunition for |
. ' y ; ' ‘ t
| testing to a testing range or other place without a permit for the purposes or to prove
any fire-arms.
(c) This licence is valid only so long as the licensee carries on the trade or business !
in the premises shown in column 3 thereof, and will ipso facto lapse if the business
is discontinued for a continuous period exceeding six months. |
'\(d) The licensee shall not enter into any partnership connected with this licence |
without the approval of the licensing authority]. |
2. The licensee shall maintain registers of all arms manufactured or converted or
shortened or repaired or tested or transferred, of all ammunition manufactured, |
converted, repaired or transferred, of all stock in hand and of all sales showing the |
particulars in such forms as may be prescribed for the purpose by the Central |
Government. |
3. He shall make available for inspection his stock and his registers on the demand |
of any Magistrate or any police-officer of a rank not below that of Inspector or, if the |
Central Government so directs, of Sub-Inspector. |
4. (1) He shall affix on a conspicuous part of his place of business, factory or |
shop a signboard, on which shall be painted in large letters in English/Hindi and in
the languages of the district his name and the words "Licensed to manufacture/converU |
shorten/repair/test/transfer/sell arms or ammunition”,
(2) He shall also affix in his place of business, factory or shop a copy of
section 36 of the Arms Act 1959, either English/Hindi or in the language of the
district.
5. He shall not manufacture fire-arms of any category or description other than
those allowed to be manufactured under column 4, nor expand his business, except
with the prior permission of the Central Government and subject to such conditions |
as may be prescribed by the Central Government. | |
6 He shall not sell to any one any fire-arm manufactured by him unless such firearm—
(a) is duly proof-tested at a Government establishment or an establishment |
approved in this behalf by the Central Government; |
| |
(b) bears proof-marks; and ; |
(c) bears identification marks as required by rule 25. |
7. He shall not sell arms or ammunition elsewhere than at the place of business, |
factory or shop specified in column 3, |
8. He shall not keep Government arms or ammunition except under the special |
or general orders of the Central Government.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this condition— |
i Added by G.S.R. 590, dated 8th May, 1982.
|
|
|

[PAGE 66]
The Arms Rules, 1962 | 91
(a) "Government arms" means a fire-arm or other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and
(b) "Government ammunition" means ammunition manufactured in a
Government factory or prepared for and supplied to Government other
than such ammunition as released by Government for civilian use.

9. He shall, at the time of sale or transfer of any arms or ammunition to a person
holding a licence in Form III, Form IV, Form VY, Form VII or VIII endorse on the
licence—

(a) the name, description and residence of the person who takes delivery of
the articles sold or transferred,

(b) the nature and quantity of the articles sold or transferred, and

(c) the date of sale or transfer, and shall sign the endorsement (and affix his
seal). !

10. He shall at the time of sale or transfer, of a weapon enter in his register the
number and other identification marks, if any, stamped on the weapon at the time of
manufacture or otherwise. pin

1]. He shall give information of all sales or transfer of arms and ammunition, to
such person and in such manner as the Central Government may: direct.

12. He shall not sell or transfer any quantity of ammunition to any person licensed
to possess or carry arms or ammunition without his first obtaining a written certificate
from such person to the effect that with the quantity of ammunition proposed to be
purchased by him, the total quantity of ammunition in his possession will not exceed
the maximum quantity which he is entitled to possess at any one time or his total
allowance for the year: >

Provided that he shall not, in any case, sell or transfer to any person any quantity
of ammunition in excess of the maximum which may be fixed by the Central
Government for such person or which is endorsed on such person’s licence.

13. He shall not sell arms and ammunition to an officer, non-commissioned officer,
or soldier of the armed forces of the Union, unless such person produces a written
pass or permit signed by his Commanding Officer, and then only to the extent and
on the conditions specified in such pass or permit.

14. Where the licence is granted in and for any local area in West Bengal or
Assam, the licencee shall not sell arms or ammunition without a special permit from
a Magistrate, to any member of a hill-tribe to which the Central Government may,
from time to tivne by notification, apply this condition.

114A. Where a licence is granted for conversion of ammunition, it shall not entitle
the licensee to convert blank cartridges or any ammunition having no projectile into
single/multiple projectile ammunition or to load or re-load any ammunition].

15. The licensee shall not sell or transfer any arms of category V to a person
residing in an area to which section 4 applies unless the satd person produces a licence,
or is exempted form the obligation to take out a licence, acquire, possess or carry such
arms in that area,
|. Ins. by G.S.R. 703. dated 15th July, 1980.

[PAGE 67]
[

f

92 The Arms Rules, 1962 |
16. The licensee shall forthwith give information at the nearest police-station of

the loss or theft of any arms or ammunition covered by the licence. f
17. Chlorates shall be kept in a building constructed of uninflammable materials
only and separated from any dwelling-house, other building highway, street, public
through fare or public place by a distance of not less 10 feet:
(

Provided that, where the total quantity stored does not exceed 100 kg. may be
kept exclusively in a closed and secured receptacle placed in a building used for the
keeping of other articles not being of an explosive or highly inflammable nature. |
18. Sulphur shall not be kept in the same room with saltpetre in the premises
specified in column 3:
Provided that when the quantity of each does not exceed 100 kg. sulphur and
saltpetre may be kept in separate closed receptacles in the same room.
19. No person shall smoke and no person fires shall be allowed at any time in

the premises specified in column 3, or in the vicinity of the receptacles mentioned in
provision to conditions 17 and 18.
20. Where any building used for storage of such material is fitted with electric
lighting or power, the licensee shail get these installations tested at least once a year
or once during the currency of the licence, by an Electrical Inspector appointed under
the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, to ensure that here is no danger of fire or sparking.
21. Any accident, fire or explosion occurring within the premises specified in |
column 3 which is attended with loss of human life or serious injury to persons or |
property shall be reported at once by the licensee to the officer-in-charge of the nearest
police-station having jurisdiction over the place of his business, factory or shop as
well as to the Inspector of explosives of the circle concerned.
''22. Subject to the other conditions contained herein, no licensee shall, without |
reasonable cause, refuse to sell arms or ammunition to any person who is entitled to
| purchase or acquire such arms or ammunition under the provision of the Arms Act, |
1959 or the Arms Rules, 1962
Explanation.—The possibility or expectation of the seller obtaining a higher price

at a later date or the refusal by a person to purchase or acquire arms or ammunition |
partly of a description demand by him and partly of'a different description suggested
by the licensee shall not be deemed to be a reasonable cause for the purpose of this
condition. |
(23. The conversion into explosives of sulphur in admixtures with Chlorates shall |

be permitted for the following purposes only (and for no other purposes):—
(i) in small quantities for scientific purposes; os |

(ii) for the purposes of manufacturing heads of matches; or

(iii) for use in toy amorces (paper caps for toy pistols.) |

I. Subs. by G.S.R. 788, dated 16th May, 1964. | |
2. Ins. by G.S.R 1324, dated 9th September, 1964.

[PAGE 68]
The Arms Rules, 1962 93
4 Ww
Sb
a
5 BS
* O —
oa Ee}
a ae oO < vo
> & oO o v A)
og & =e &
ot ten “eS WO ra
OT me om
oo 0 aon
af O A'S
ber ay
fa 2S p> )
ah.
ao An = te
ov 3 6.8 a
Soe ae = a
Oil eas wv > & rar
a & ~~, |
esi = cd oD
= Qo o © o% ob
to oS of 3 5
a =) © 4) F)
N da > ” .=)
a & a
a as
Stent “— Lal
oS — ae ee
r; é 3 z |&
Ff “eu : BS i | bp
S |s28 3 a
° CoB + a 3 me
hes w i
a {825 |+] = | 35 es
uw 3 O a: ty
E on et Oo } o 9 Y E 2
Vie o 8 o mG ¢ 2S ” a
bn oe eB ae oo 2 O
ft Ss jo) oS ow
son 'é) — 3 6 0 4 nal
ou ao , e U i: <
Ma asa 6p @ = a
oO 9» OSM «ws 8 mi = oo
as ~ oo rox
— ao, Spe ao soe ee geal a fd oY ah
i ao Oo =a = i ae a, a) [i > wy :
ct co ss * e YVogm fara Oo a
re mA i w ga Ge > sf So. wt
@ es aos Oo wo w wa Sed
a wn Qo * mS = ~ —_ it = wo
Coed i nu} os 8 = byes © ;
° a OF unt 65 Sig oS -— Y =
° o = UA = Fo bo = |£s5 =
~ Qo oo = 2° 3 8 of = 8 or}
fy as “a VA HY > cd eo) a a >
bs O. ae So wt Sz a (ry ° mt OS
Short o wo
— —_
w os a8
rs
S 229 a &
a oq Vw o =
wo] oS As
5 tS i ; rai
a le ; : rer
re ey OS ; . AN
e8ay ef ia
ie weg: 3 3 re ga
eZee = ‘=
3 : 3 : =
a. “os ae bee Mo
: ‘Ss mn.
52 o © oO Si
& ont <= > o.0
— % — | & ay ao)
oe. ioe ~~ a
ieee! 4) Se co a :
* [1 © 0 =
‘ S es
a 2 , mm oy

[PAGE 69]
94 The Arms Rules, 1962 |
CONDITIONS [

|. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, and ff

of the Arms Rules, 1962.
2. The licensee shall carry on the work of proof testing and stamp proof-marks i

on the fire-arms which are proved, in accordance with regulation framed or approved :
by the Central Government for the purpose. ;
3. The licence is valid only so long as the licensee carries on the work of proof- |

test and’ if the work is discontinued for a continuous period of more than one year, E
the licence shall ipso facto expire.
4. The licensee shall maintain a register of all fire-arms received for proving of

of those proof-tested, of all stock in hand, of all fire-arms disposed of after proof-test, |
showing the particulars in such forms as may be prescribed by the Central Government f

for the purpose. t
5. He shall make available for inspection his stock and his registers on the demand {

of any Magistrate or any police-officer of a rank not below that of Inspector, or if the
Central Government so directs, of Sub-Inspector.
6. (1) He shall affix on a conspicuous part of his place of business, factory or
shop a signboard on which shall be painted in large letters in English/Hindi and in i
the language of the district his name and the words “Licensed to proof-test fire-arms f
of categories as shown in column 4 of the licence.” f
It

(2) He shall also affix, to his place of business or factory a copy of section 36 ;

of the Arms Act, 1959 either in English/Hindi or in the language of the district. :
7, He shall not proof-test fire-arms elsewhere than at the place of business or [
factory specified in column 3. |
8 The licencee shall forthwith give information at the nearest police-station ol t

the loss or theft of any arms or ammunition covered by the licence. |
h

: t |

t

; E

[PAGE 70]
The Arms Rules, 1962 9
w a eee eee
BZBeoun : , : .
bee ms coy = :
6 V9eos es ini eS
wo SSI Pt r © : =
“ ae aA) et Rea F mm
°e bes : : tt : an
~ S598 | |e fief
te “od fu Sere
ee Cy et ee a ; : =
eS Sia Fees. oo oe 5 3} ©
o> OM) te te v ‘ * H =
fla a : 9 .
a) es Go wn Ss ee ba
2 iS | | i
ae = i: & : »
Sh 2 tae 8 ac
so p> a 2 4 8 aS)
wm SO ens "S = b+ (os Osa
en Se yo SS tm fs) =~ OY
2 =e f2% ££ 3 : eo. a
aie seit ~~ OA me s = % i
o — 5 ¥ ; ES
oO” < & Oe 8 2 e
aa Sel a. » + & & O A,
a iete SBS] 609 ae UEY
ao oe) Oe yt! pas aa) wc UG
i= _/ oO we O air a C) Sf. 0 .
5 oO o 0 as ree rei
ON Qo i Spe 2 8 5% ;
ripen en ; ow i — gq 2
qe ef: 3 dQ
— : m
: 2 Sia |s
So yemet uo Ge ‘aka : oO
a — os: . ity
— tf om uo , wy Phe + wo :
Pom l oe & Oo &w ea . oe 'S
x =A cE i ae = oO oo
a {86 Eaeu 2 82, 2
©O so a= Ss 2s & GE > z
x= od ac 2 - oo a
-~ = $s = wh ao & Yos 7
a -— © tee aw i ey, Fee gt 2
ie a oo So Og a5 ae
Or % Sa 7 Oo oS on ma 5)
Sw wi oO a ae & ol :
— sf] 4 0 > OSH = ai
¢ aA oe eel 3,
cS) o SS eg Sek &
stent et o ras KRAD
«2 e oo & ae |
a e ada
are) wal rd ~ 2 & op bn
WV smu py oO <t hassel AH es 8
=e Oo ~wis 2 3 - = <<
| Oe oO Oe [1) a <
ge segs |” | L fF esss
rs oo. os a = 5 ebses
E & i oO =? BA aRe
: ; i 94 Bie Ee 3
» ° _~ : = Suy-se
he SCotryu : = 8 35 3
— f= av vi es : fags. Ba 8se
Ea beeese = oo F SSats
> (3 oee= : = 0 UN .—
SS oVeorid ol a 2 Sore
a a RoDO, As wes
os oa ee i Saye.
ns | co ‘i a SHAOKM
: : i 38 ee
0 : *, fe
: au AY Pag yO
= a ceo —_— 2.23 2
bs oe. 9 ; ao Agnus
Fein : :
‘ 4 A= 2 2 . : mnmown <<
a +* oF Pie 2 2D 3 | } 3 3
. eS CO) en sa wy
o 2

[PAGE 71]
96 The Arms Rules, 1962
CONDITIONS

1. (a) This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959
and of the Arms Rules, 1962.

(b) This licence entitles the licensee to fabricate components and parts of firearms and ammunition for purposes of '[repair of fire-arms and conversion of repair
of] ammunition of the categories shown in column 4, but does not entitle him to
manufacture such components or parts for the purpose of; or utilised for assembling
into complete arms or ammunition.

(c) This licence does not entitle the dealer to take any arms or ammunition to a
testing range or other place without a permit for the purpose, or to prove any fire- .
arms.

(d) This licence is valid only so long as he carries on the trade business in the
premises shown in column 3 thereof and will ipso facto laps if the business is
discontinued for a continuous period exceeding six months.

2. The licensee shall maintain registers of all arms and ammunition in stock, and
of all sales showing the particulars in such Form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government for the purpose.

3. He shall make available for inspection his stock and his registers on the demand
of any magistrate or any police-officer of a rank not below that of Inspector, or, if the
Central Government so directs, of Sub-Inspector.

4 (1) He shall affix on a conspicuous part of his place of business, factory or shop
a signboard, on which shall be painted in large letters in English/Hindi and in the
language of the district his name and the words “licensed to convert/repair/test (other
than proof-test/sell/transfer arms and ammunition)”

(2) He shall also affix in his place of business, factory or shop a copy of
section 36 of the Act, either in English/Hindi or in the language of the district.

| 5. He shall not convert an imitation fire-arm into a fire-arm or shorten a fire-arm
on the strength of this licence. |

*[SA. Where a licence is granted for conversion of ammunition, it shall not entitle the
licensee to convert blank cartridges or any ammunition having no projectile into single/
multiple projectile ammunition or to load or re-load any ammunition. ]

6. He shall not sell the arms or ammunition covered by the licence, elsewhere
than at the place of business, factory or shop specified in column 3.

7. He shall not keep Government arms or ammunition unless he is specially |
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government. _ 4

Explanation.—For the purpose of this condition—

(a) “Government arms” means a fire-arm or other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and
(b) “Government ammunition” means ammunition manufactured in any
Government factory or prepared for and supplied to the Government other
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 1689, dated 9th September, 1970.
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 703, dated 15th July, 1981.

[PAGE 72]
The Arms Rules, 1962 97
than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian use.

8. He shall at the time of sale or transfer of any arms or ammunition to a person
holding a licence in Form III, Form IV, Form VII or Form VIII endorse on the licence-—

(a) the name, description and residence of the person who takes delivery of
the articles sold or transferred.
(b) the nature and quantity of the articles sold or transferred, and
(c) the date of sale or transfer,
and shall sign the endorsement and affix his seal.

9. He shall at the time of sale or transfer of a weapon enter in his register the
number and other identification marks, if any, stamped on the weapon at the time of
manufacture or otherwise.

10. He shall give information of all sales or transfer of arms and ammunition, to
such person and in such manner as the Central Government may direct.

11. He shall not sell or transfer ammunition to any person, licensed to possess or.
carry arms without his first obtaining a written certificate from such person to the
effect that, with the quantity of ammunition proposed to be acquired by him the total
quantity of ammunition in his possession shall not exceed the maximum quantity which
he is entitled to possess at any one time of his total allowance for the year: |

Provided that he shall not in any case sell or transfer to any person any quantity
of ammunition in excess of the maximum which may be fixed by the Central
Government for such person or which is endorsed on such person’s licence.

12. He shall not sell arms or ammunition to an officer, non-commissioned officer
or soldier of the armed forces of the Union unless such person produces a written pass :
or permit signed by the Commanding Officer, and then only to the extent and on the”
conditions specified in such pass or permit.

13. Where the licence is granted in and for any local area in West Bengal or
Assam, the licensee shall not sell arms or ammunition, without a special permit from
a Magistrate to any member of a hill-tribe to which the Central Government may from time
to time by notification apply this condition.

14. The licensee shall forthwith give information at the nearest police station of the
loss or theft of any arms or ammunition covered by the licence.

'[15. Subject to the other conditions contained herein, no licensee shall without
reasonable cause, refuse to sell arms or ammunition to any person who is entitled to
purchase or acquire such arms or ammunition under the provisions of the Arms Act,
1959 or the Arms Rules, 1962

Explanation.—The possibility or expectation of the seller obtaining a higher price
at a later date or the refusal by a person to purchase or acquire arms or ammunition
partly of a description demanded by him and partly of a different description suggested
|. Ins. by G.S.R. 788, dated 16th May, 1964. ‘

[PAGE 73]
98 The Arms Rules, 1962 |
by the licensee, shall not be deemed to be a reasonable cause for the purpose of this |
condition]. |
1116. The conversion into explosives of sulphur in admixture with chlorates
shall be permitted for the following purposes only (and for no other purposes):—
(i) in small quantities for scientific purposes, or
(ii) for the purposes of manufacturing heads of matches, or
(iii) for use in toy amorces (paper caps for toy pistol). |
I. Ins. by G.S.R. 1324, dated 9th September, 1964.

[PAGE 74]
The Arms Rules, 1962 99
ben ' id . a
a 2 £ i a
Fe = Sp pe Bg
S oO : :
— — a | ; » & . pot i
i o 22 or ul Es v
= ac v Sf ft gy ?
ee epee |
Oo :.uf & *
° o © w my ie i : “
rr] Se Ye ms : . pee
= i FP Sy a | s, | ee : = 2
oe o ° = v o» <= + oh g a
cP ae a 2 ot oh fe
. & vo © ¢q@iiug = of
> g Wa ro S ee
a ir eS, o om o £ A gq #
he v= oO ; Oo —
O ey So 5 : ie Te
. © oO of @ : oh '
2 a o i ran _ : : - ao 4
oon GC = <) peal jc oh = S t
£Ss |S5.2 9 :£ : 6a7
a o i ;
= = = 5 6 & in = a gate: SES
— = om iw i fe we | OC mgOoc
rp = Ww =I ——_— a
—— Os = Oo Gwe: ZB c=:
Pom 0 ers tan oes
mm So tw 7 ™ fe |
gel 25 mA ie : 8 2 |
it tome - FE en, 2 a a
Paaee poet =e ey a * © * sia
— OS. - J a4 t tg > &
we eS a : aq: O |
ee nm ant a F ; ©
s Ey VES Soe ed 1s
ag = | Od 5 2° 8 << = _
4 i ee Tae av oo
© omy — es UY = oa os
fa oo o - 3 & a BO. an
= 2 aqayew W ee ea | Zefa ™ |ae2 cA
ce a eo Ww Cotes aoe oe ti
i. = 3 5 Oo a. 5 ns
© 3S a & op "2
oe or ral > O of =
a — i a ws — 1 ol
oe oOo a ol = = ‘a |
- o © Co” | ee AAD
m 2 po a. oD OD Ss
a
2 bp z EZ. 5 60 20
2 ei es 4
a & a bt 5 <<
Sent Wo .ee a) A &
= ce St 2 = 9
= o4¥ og oe a td
. Ss. & oO : vom: a3 ~ 9 2
— -_ 2 mw “nS oO
- : an ao
= 5o ns Ss [NS a Fue |o gc
o = van) GD ~
aa nO ty Eb Sc —=a5
eT ev og Co Oo —
w So ~ od . ee
td wr * eye
S : ; <= p~ .
fae Z. (3) : ce men ee:
vie Ga e : a w FO
a sO v -_ . wo, Sas
= [~ em) ce

[PAGE 75]
100 The Arms Rules, 1962
CONDITIONS

1. (a) This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959
and of the Arms Rules, 1962.

(b) This licence does not entitle the dealer to take any arms or ammunition for

testing to a testing range or other place without a permit for the purpose, or to prove
any fire-arms.

(c) This licence is valid only so long as he carries on the trade or business in the
premises shown in column 3 thereof , and will ipso facto lapse if the business is
discontinued for a continuous period exceeding six months.

2. The licensee shall maintain registers of all arms and ammunition in stock, and
of all sales showing the particulars in such Form as may be prescribed by the Central
Government for the purpose.

3. He shall make available for inspection his stock and his registers on the demand
of any Magistrate or any police-officer of a rank not below that of Inspector, or, if the
Central Governmental so directs, of Sub-Inspector.

4 (1) He shall affix on a conspicuous part of his place of business or shop a
signboard, on which shall be painted in large letters in English/Hindi and in the
language of the district his name and the words "licensed to sell, transfer or test (other
than prof test) arms and ammunition."

(2) He shall also affix in his place of business, or shop a copy of section 36 of
the Act, in English/Hindi or in the language of the district.

5. He shall not sell the arms or ammunition covered by the licence, elsewhere
than at the place of business, factory or ship specified in cloumn 3.

6. He shall not keep Government arms or ammunition unless he is specially
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this conditions—
(a) “Government arms” means a fire-arms or other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and cen
(b) “Government ammunition” means ammunition manufactured in any
Government factory, or prepared for and supplied to the Government other
than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian
use. ,

7. He shall at the time of sale or transfer of any arms or ammunition to a person
holding a licence in Form II], Form IV, Form V, Form VII or Form VIII endorse on
the licence— aan =

(a) the name, description and residence of the person who takes
delivery of the articles sold or transferred,
- (b) the nature and quantity of the articles sold or transferred, and
(c) the date of sale or transfer.

[PAGE 76]
The Arms Rules, 1962 107

8. He shall at the time of sale or transfer of a weapon enter in his register the
number and other identification marks, if any, stamped on the weapon at the time of
manufacture or otherwise.

9. He shall give information of all sales or transfers of arms and ammunition to
such person and in such manner as the Central Government may direct.

10. He shall not sell or transfer ammunition to any person, licensed to possess or
carry arms, without his first obtaining a written certificate from such person to the
effect that, with the quantity of ammunition proposed to be acquired by him, the total
quantity of ammunition in his possession shall not exceed the maximum quantity which
he is entitled to possess at any one time or his total allowance for the year;

Provided that he shall not in, any case sell or transfer to any person any quantity
of ammunition in excess of the maximum which may be fixed by the Central
Government for such person or which is endorsed on such person’s licence.

11. He shall not sell arms and ammunition to an officer non-commissioned officer
or soldier of the armed forces of the Union unless such person produces a written pass
or permit signed by the Commanding Officer, and then only to the extent and on the
conditions specified in such pass or permit. ,

12. Where the licence is granted and for any local area in West Bengal or Assam,
the licensee shal] not sell arms or ammunition without a special permit from a
Magistrate, to any member of a hill-tribe to which the Central Government may, form
time to time by notification, apply this condition.

13. The licencee shall forthwith give information at the nearest police-station of
the loss or theft of any arms or ammunition covered by the licence. !

'[14. Subject to the other conditions contained herein, no licensee shall, without
reasonable causes, refuse to sell arms or ammunition to any person who is enti#éd to
purchase or acquire such arms or ammunition under the provisions of the Arms Act,
1959 or the Arms Rules, 1962.

Explanation.—The possibility or expectation of the seller obtaining a higher price
at a later date or the refusal by a person to purchase or acquire arms or ammunition
partly of a description demanded by him and partly of a different description suggested
by the licensee, shall not be deemed to be a reasonable cause for the purpose of this
condition. |
|, Ins. by G.S.R. 788, dated 16th May, 1964. .

[PAGE 77]
]
102 The Arms Rules, 1962
wn * ys @ 6
qg 2 v : . H :
P arenes : 2-24 od ea
ag o oe es ci)
a= a ££ wo a ; : ;
= eo F & 5) oe
E B63 @ ii:
E 7 o Pb
lH . ; a
= mw CHO L on y he: Sie
eH obs 8 e va ae ee os
a 25222 x ye & OU ae
7 Euwgs = aa Boe
cS a 8 pom o 3
4 i i
: a ae |
wv ap ¢ Sof o>
Sons Oo m= o he ‘ . vo
wa —_— oe] > . i be
“i = Sus in = at
s 55° 3 oO :: (2) Cy tne
lid 3 & PP ion 7 : C) bh ©
Oe af RS is fei 8
= *
= sg : a
i ge i rad
a e& 5 oc = 8) w
ay ee cS oO on YB Y a
et i cd st o
eo (se? 4. |=
>, a Ad <|%3 =~
© i [1] Ow os
a 3 8 Z |&o 7
a —
© & 5 is =e Unt
“”a ee ‘
a 2 Bo Oo > 0
s Tes well: on S - =
Swe Ob ~ 1o
— © o ° oO re =
a a can 2 oe —
E . a a 5
|
Fi) 2 oF w O
see ov —¥ 2
eo 3. 3 la
a ae Gg hb 2
» oV’og a
ee) — 5) — . co pac
i ‘Ts cS : a ™
“ o%° Ss — a =
aot Cis s a= : ty ‘
ri ~ Ow ¥ : 5 F a
— 6D .
rma oa oo . .
sa aoe : a) :
—_ ’
ro ce] 7)
ss o | ae >
F = oC . as) Ww
= eke a o
— = Ilaoo _ Q = |
% a an : E
% ) —- ao ©
F Ww eo oe .
a - -

[PAGE 78]
The Arms Rules, 1962 103
CONDITIONS

1, (a) This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 and
of the Arms Rules, 1962,

(b) This licence does not entitle the dealer to take any arms or ammunition for
testing to a testing range or other place without a permit for the purpose, or to prove
any fire-arms.

(c) This licence is valid only so long as he carries on the trade or business in the
premises shown in column 3 thereof, and will ipso facto lapse if the business is discontinued
for a continuous period exceeding six months.

2. The licensee shall maintain registers of all arms and ammunition in stock and
of all sales showing the particulars in such Forms as may be prescribed by the Central
Government for the purpose.

3. He shall make available for inspection his stock and his registers on the demand
of any Magistrate or any police-officer of a rank not below that of Inspector, or, if the
Central Government so directs, of Sub-Inspector.

4. (1) He shall affix on a conspicuous part of his place of business, factary or
shop a signboard, on which shall be painted in large letters in English/Hindi and in
the language of the district his name and the words "licensed to sell, transfer or test
(other than proof-test arms or ammunition)". 7

(2) He shall also affix in his place of business or shop a copy of section 36 of
the Act, in English/Hindi or in the language of the district.

5. He shall not keep Government arms or ammunition covered by the licence elsewhere
than the place of business, factory or shop specified in column 3.

6. He shall not keep Goverment arms or ammunition unless he is specrally
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this conditions—

(a) "Government arms" means a fire-arm or other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and

(b) "Government ammunition" means ammunition manufactured in any
Government factory ot prepared for and supplied to Government other
than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian
use.

J. He shall, at the time of sale or transfer of any arms or ammunition to a person
holding a licence in Form II], Form IV, Form V, Form VII or Form VIII endorse on
the licence— ,

(a) the name, description and residence of the person who takes
delivery of the articles sold or transferred;

(b) the nature and quantity of the articles sold or transferred; and

(c) the date of the sale or transfer.

[PAGE 79]
104 , The Arms Rules, 1962

8. He shall, at the time of sale or transfer of a weapon, enter in his register the number
and other identification marks, if any, stamped on the weapon at the time of manufacture
or otherwise.

9. He shall give information of all sales or transfer of arms or ammunition, to such
person and in such manner as the Central Government may direct.

| 10, He shall not sell or transfer ammunition to any person, licensed to possess or
carry arms without his first obtaining a written certificate from such person to the
effect that, with the quantity of ammunition proposed to be purchased by him, the
total quantity of ammunition in his possession will not exceed the maximum quantity
which he is entitled to possess at any one time of his total allowance for the year:

Provided that he shall not in any case sell or transfer to any person any quantity
of ammunition in excess of the maximum which may be fixed by the Central
Government for such person or which is endorsed on such person’s licence.

11. He shall not sell arms or ammunition to an officer, non-commissioned officer
or soldier of the armed forces of the Union unless such person produces a written pass
or permit signed by the Commanding Officer, and then only to the extent and on the
conditions specified in such pass or permit.

12. Where the licence is granted in and for any local area in West Bengal or
Assam, the licensee shall not sell arms or ammunition, without a special permit from
a Magistrate to any member of a hill-tribe to which the Central Government may from
time to time by notification apply this condition.

13. The licence shall not sell or transfer any arms of category V to a person
residing in an area to which section 4 applies, unless the said person produces a

- licence, or is exempted from the obligation to take out a licence to acquire, possess
or carry such arms in that area.
14. The licensee shall forthwith give information at the nearest police-station of
| the loss or theft of any arms or ammunition covered by the licence.

15. Chlorates shall be kept in building constructed of uninflammable materials
only and separated from any dwelling house, other building, highway, street, public
thoroughfare or public place by a distance of not less than 10 feet:

Provided that, where the total quantity stored does not exceed 100 kg., chlorates
may be kept exclusively in a closed and secured receptacle placed in a building used
for the keeping of other articles not being on an explosive or highly inflammable
nature. |

16. Sulphur shall not be kept in the same room with saltpetre in the premises
specified in column 3: ;

Provided that where the quantity of each does not exceed 100 kg. sulphur and

| saltpetre can be kept in separate closed receptacles in the same room.

17. No person shall smoke and no open fires shall be allowed at any time in the
premises specified in column 3, or in the vicinity of the receptacles mentioned in
provisos to conditions [5 and 16.

[PAGE 80]
The Arms Rules, 1962 105

18. Where any building used for storage of such materials is fitted with electric
lighting or power, the licensee shall get these installation tested at least once a year
or once during the currency of the licence, by an Electrical Inspector appointed under
the Indian Electricity Act, 1910, to ensure that there is no danger of the sparking.

19. Any accident, fire or explosion occurring within the premises specified in
column 3 which is attended with loss of human life or serious injury to persons or
property shall be reported at once by the licensee to the officer-in-charge of the nearest
police-station having jurisdiction over this place of business, factory or shop as well
as to the Inspector of Explosives of the circle concerned.

'{20. Subject to the other conditions contain herein, no licencee shall without reasonable
cause, refuse to sell arms or ammunition to any person who is entitled to purchase or
acquire such arms or ammunition under the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 or the Arms
Rules, 1962.

Explanation.—The possibility or expectation of the seller obtaining a higher price
at a later date or the refusal by a person to purchase or acquire arms or ammunition _
partly of a description demanded by him and partly of different description suggested
by the licensee, shall not be deemed to be a reasonable cause for the purpose of this’
condition. ]
|. Ins. by G.S.R. 788, dated 16th May, 1964. ,

[PAGE 81]
106 The Arms Rules, 1962
= rm eh Pa
c a4 : 3 ee -
_ ans) | aa 2 ib og =
= o w a: - # :
° ‘at ES - oe &
w eo” co . § ‘
os ee ot 3} |
S rs oS ss |
= f=) 2 ls pea ok
os ee — . A : vie
a a & an Oo =
mo 3 1 ae 3 oo a
cel 4 ; : : =
[xe «(CSS h 4) ae) ei ot : 1 «9
= = o nos & =
esa _— ~~ OO x Ba wv
ie ze S a So
ed Tt o : : wl|[ ae
wS Oo = nan Vila
me AL at BS (t
oe < o a : YY
~ s a we an
+ an A
Oe em aeons
gE ° So§ se Ele
poe a a — —_ Pal
— ms “ f
= “x E cs << 1 <3
jot = © = LB) _~
oO &® SE oe oe
in
a 3 an ale 3 7
bie 6 6 = ——*
i we ;
om = oS Ss — > Kes
w” So a)
os ”, m | 5
ao 2 aa) z
— pe a
= 9 Olea n
_ CN
See es Tl o unl
o i nm
Ye =) Bi 5
het
be
=~ > 2 m | f=
a ul
= 'S eo" Nee! PY
- a rs
— =
: ans * 5
they = = ics n
wv oO me : of oe laa
= ‘ga ao © Wn
eee : :
% -5 ° | ia
w ge v
= | wo b=
‘a. % ‘
+ ,f2
nn . fae nt

[PAGE 82]
The Arms Rules, 1962 107
CONDITIONS

1, This license is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, and
of the Arms Rules, 1962.

2, It covers only the arms or ammunition of the description given in column 2
so long as they are kept, in the place described in column 3, but does not authorise
the licensee:—

(i) to carry arms or,
(ii) to kept Government arms or ammunition.
| Explanation.—For the purpose of this condition—
(a) “Government arms" means a fire-arm or other weapon which is the
property of the Government; and
(b) "Government ammunition" means ammunition manufactured in
Government factory, or prepared for and supplied for civilian use.
3. (a) The licensee shall maintain separate registers of all arms or ammunition
deposited with him under this licence— |
(1) under section 21(1), and 4
(11) for safe custody otherwise than under section 21(2), showing particulars
in such Forms as may be prescribed by the Central Government for the
purpose.

(b) A copy of each of the registers certified by the dealer as a true copy, relating
to each preceding quarter of a calendar year, shall be forwarded within one week after
the expiry of the quarter, to the District Magistrate, the quarters ending on the last
day of March, June, September, December. 7

4, He shall not receive for deposit arms or ammunition without verifying—

(a) that they are not being deposited with any ma/a fide intention, and

(b) in case they are being deposited otherwise than under section 21(1),
that they are covered by a valid possession licence or are exempted
from the need for such licence.

5. He shall not charge fees for keeping or maintaining the deposited articles in
excess of the prescribed rates.

6. He shall not return to the depositor or sell the arms and ammunition deposited
except in the manner and to the extent permitted for the sale of arms and ammuniton
to such depositor/purchaser. |

7. On the expiry of the period prescribed for forfeiture of the arms or ammunition
deposited, he shall deposit them in the malkhana of the district or such other place
as may be specified by the State Government for the purpose.

8. He shall make available for inspection such arms or ammunition and his registers
on the demand of any Magistrate or any police officer of a rank not below that of
Inspector, or, if the Central Government so directs, of Sub-Inspector.

[PAGE 83]
108 The Arms Rules, 1962
9. The licencee shall—

(a) either inform the nearest police-station and the District Magistrate
personally or despatch information to the officer-in-charge of the policestation and the District Magistrate concerned by registered post on the
day of deposit or return or disposal, .as the case may be,

(b) forthwith inform the police-station and the District Magistrate concerned
of the loss or theft of any deposited article.

Note—A licence in this form will be granted for a period ending on the day on
which the licensee’s licence in Form IX, Form XI, Form XII, or Form XII, as the
case may be, is due to expire.

[PAGE 84]
The Arms Rules, 1962 109
im wo ers so
La] Q TT: ‘ * = i #
mS os os mt,
geo s = 7: mie | a
ae ee a ie com i .
; : i « wy
se) ~~ : x s bd *
a~ o el 3 ef us a
; oat a bin Eos 3 ra
4 a ‘ ‘
Bee oe a 33
« oOo -_ * : ; &
Sb ae ~t
Nien a = oe & 3 ae)
i) 4 : '
- Sy & EO & }oo 7 fs on G
os o. _ *# & = ~
=) > wi E uw 2
= pally » o ww
= < .
= i i ; a) 1
= jet : ; pay ™ 3 6
° a) Cg a
= ) O Fe Ge Ss
ee ane . . ‘ i
= & oO =. 3 ii ~oe . = n a SO
me eS iP) oO .- a | . e et
m s = oO Obes | = . 2 52
ro) one os 2° & a ; a c < oo
wi ane ; - O ” .
's co oO w nN vu =e
eee ine EG & ©
i) tet mK op VA YP Ww aD i oO
= Son 8 nae Po ND xs oS oe
E ~ Ow &
am = = = = > 8 v' = 2
= * 5 ’ =< = S 5%
= —s
m2 |s QO ¢ 3 Aes &
= = nm a 90 “i ea 6 Fy
° < A bs v's
— i) o wv nm: «SS os
= a a: = a te ES o
i ec = e'pOo @ =
3 4 =~ an = = Se ag
en =: mo a on
os wn Oo ww 8] oc © on
~ of “i = ©
bn cc em hall i) =
~— we ov ov YY a ber
~ << ° 3 as co Ooo = 0
a nee < — ce am ff a a)
nig o _, — an, =
tot ion aa ea) ae = Ry cane 2
hes ee WwW gq & ~~] 23 WV
=] 4 > Oo o x >
foe o ~~ 4 & a o em)
he : nd | an SO oN
= fs So 2 = ye 8 =
o OD : nm vy & 3 Ys we Q on
bt ow a cn ri Sx =
Pa Sato we “ ~ G € wo 7. ee oO. Bs *
wv 2 o : » oO S51 @ wd
aa | : ae a = O - wn
. Of om: “oO oC") . §
se 2S es O53 5 1 5
Soro r=) Sse 6 silos
s¢gss eso fe. D EI] BU
Wee O eS : “aa _ -_— —
“ cl
wn Ww © |e a Pr) o ‘oO =.
*1& o cr) be << Ow
4 a sin en 2 ant . as
eee om = A _

[PAGE 85]
110 The Arms Rules, 1962 e.
5 2 Soe 48 4
SEs on ae — a
ga 8S si 2 4 & = $s i
e059 ” = PS as = ss :
- = .8 3 2 3 & ui ‘3S '
a 5 14 8 3 . me ‘
2 c Pst b= B= a >= a
vu Oo = op : a a sy ea 4
«fa SOR o yom & “a 6S j
2 a5% = “ ; oF ale ae ° oO i
gn A oS a ae rr Age ‘

c & Ff robSL a § o ;
‘ss o e 8 yy oe: Mee a + Ooo 2
oO ca ne 7 of of ay oe oOo ? Y a
bly i F . co i o vo F
2 Ss Foe ee ee sont! Soe a. :
3m an , £ yoo 2 « ee ‘
AH 3 be cB vee oA noe TS F
: § . — wo o 4
é Fs * — | ae | i — ie
= ay aS : : es oY © ez aa eB b
— uF) = mM . MG ee phe joo ol | :
_ O ben = 60 ; : - a ow s wm 0 2 b
> or . : ' Q ke oO
= = ew *. . * js ond ~ !
& Oo. a os ft ow fs <a @ t
e | Bs is: 2y os t
o , ; : : i
x Ge ot G&i:ie: : ae | = 2
e o ad ¢ 3 ™ er ; cg of . =| To oO
w vv aw © — - wg « & a oo so |
re aw Past a oO = , 8 coc oO oc
= a 2 ~ oS - Sf co . oe
a, a ‘4 . a
% Some GB : a 2S 6
‘ps ce &§ Woe: : OM ot Yo
=" Selb ee a ee” Re = et oman

oma a, GS oan ms vee SD) 4 6 05 : ; NM “rec A S é

he oo . & w°s a . Gi Go

m UO >... =| 2i:t ogo. @4Eae
& oO : : i— vi ~~

= eo — we =

be i —_ F — te cf " .

“ * = fo os 2 & E dO xz oe |
ce ‘ : = ov eT

O = = 2 Oe 4 a << ro Ae =

= ao wi ; ; O ces “= o
| . Oo &
& i* 13 ris BE. es =
a — ‘
t = So a ee gE va
CS Cel
= S B) & o
; © ao & So PR Se ~
<7 6 ~~ he na vo Se 5
= =f — = ou — cet hes A
ee 9 abe > ui [—
_ wn “et ae 2 =
he as ) 4) , on
es =| Ss om ee cn
® rie] co = i *
a: Ph <) Eye 2a GH 5
te Rony £33 = 242 so f=
@ i en LK 3.20 ‘7 Sis S =
2 s) W) D'O A > ial © oO
Si me — oO vv as v
~ “AS Q
a) jw 9,2 .~ Y
2 Ss Ss a
— 2.9 3 a
v : am ors
Sai md a wn Qe o 2 2D
i ol "a
Fs cs ; = oO °° oe ’
5; os )
r" —-, 2S
io : os a.0 -& ~
Oo ti : Ha. eS yy on)
Pint : — wi :
~~ © ‘ GB Co
Ve o—
Se aS egea a8 :| 2
m7 ey, Soo ose
nw mS : pal a te
FS oo : al = ou pe
eel) ay u = bi) : — OB ad © ne
* = o co F = = o ad i
*|Eos Z eee S22) °
— co * 4 Eo Pa | .
| a Le — AD nad le

[PAGE 86]
The Arms Rules, 1962 111
FORM XVII
Licence of export (by sea or air) of arms or ammunition
Lf eee]
ARMS AMMU-
NITION
= a
5S Ep = 2 sy =
a = 2 5 0
ie) S oy 2 =
a § me E 2 5 0)
ae. c o ic Ss ao 2 3 SS
S 8 < o ee =
5 a = rm ae = oe
=O Fs I) = ‘co Se S of =
ok _ © Ss So « 6 8 &
ne = ee: ee Se ce ne arse
a 4 C2 zs) 3 bp 2 i] = ce ee v Oo "Ss
cE & ss i a = a Tie = 2 omg “2 a ie:
a oO uy o) a) 3 5) eo 5 ass) 3 Ss a & a
ZAB2Se 2 G@ 4 © 8&8 #4 oR Baetae
| 2 3 4 5 6 i ° 8 9 10 | |
ahaa le a a T_T a a a a ;
TRE sc OE case Ouran (Signature) |
(SEAL) Licensing Authority— —
Designation— -—
Place—
TOG: ..nare0s QU noracears de Unenchen Date on which a copy is sent to the ..... eee
Agent or Master of Vessel or air carrier at
EO sx secpvcslizeztnnstheonrcenerinnsstrimmniersdéevaecmies DOLL CLOTS
33(1)].
CONDITIONS .
|. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, and of the Arms
Rules, 1962,
2, The articles shall not be conveyed by any route other than that specified in column 7 and
bulk shall not be broken nor shall the consignment be stopped, before the articles reach the
place of destination.
|. Omitted by G.S.R. |, dated 19th December, 1997 (w.e.f. 3-1-1998),

[PAGE 87]
112 The Arms Rules, 1962
3. An account of the contents of each package shall be legibly written thereon; and
where the articles are conveyed by rail each package shall be marked with the word "Arms"
or "Ammunition", as the case may be, so as to be readily recognisable by the railway
authorities. :
FORM XVIII |
Licence for export (by land or river) of arms or ammunition
FLOM. ..ccceccscccees DOs ceseceseeesseceneeenes
pee]
ee ee
ARMS AMMUa = NITION ~ a Y
2 &h 5 4 Sn 5)
oy 8 iS) - Se ~ =
a = es 8 5 ©
a = ws J 5 ev eS
6 w rs za O ‘B of =
= oO ” oD AS ‘= og ‘3 6b O
a 2 on = a : § ao -o
A ss os 5 5 © S © nan §
Qo -= oS aa — a An) Se oO Q ° =
SS. & BB s B by 3 g 8 SS Sy
go e 6 5 m= oD eo) i o w 2
pee fav eB © So £2 2's
ao yw S) © 9) bs & 3 E fo a § 5 7
eS a a) a a SF uy aw ie Ao a 2
seen re eee emery i oii linn ici
1 2 3 at 5 6 (aa 9 10 11
i nents te er eae
Fromthe........ccecseeee
Tothe...............20......
The......... of..... 20... Date on which a certificate of 'no objection’ is obtained
fFOM oo. .eeeessseseeseseeseeeeee the Government of the State of Jammu
and Kashmir,
District Magistrate of the district of .................. (viderule 50).
The........ of... 20... Date on which a copy is sent to the District Magistrate of
the oo..cccccceseseeseeeeseeserereeseeeeeee District/Government of the State
of Jammu and Kashmir [vide rule 34 (a)]. >
District Magistrate of ....................... district [vide rule 34(b)].
(Signature)
The........ of..... 20... Licensing Authority .................... Desigmation ........ seer
(SEAL) PACE | csscccscaccamcenenars
1. Omitted by G.S.R. 1, dated 19th December, 1997 (w.ce.f. 3-1-1998).

[PAGE 88]
The Arms Rules, 1962 113
CONDITIONS

1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, and of
the Arms Rules, 1962.

2. The articles shall not be conveyed by any route other than that specified in column
7 and bulk shall not be broken, nor shall the consignment be stopped, before the articles reach
the place of destination.

3, An account of the contents of each package shall be legibly written thereon; and
where the articles are conveyed by rail, each package shall be marked with the word "Arms"
or "Ammunition" as the case may be so as to be readily recognisable by the railway
authorities.

FORM XIX
Licence for export and re-import/import, transport and re-export
of arms and ammunition

2 ial
See A a nC nn Se ee Se ee ee

ARMS AMMU- fe
7” NITION w |
S63 o> 3
o 4 oo =)
Oo fh» a =
soe
o oie a a
SEG g 5 4 v
Oo ~ & ® 2 eS
a SR OS 2 Pa w
7 & a Ww) - i) a a <a
aoeto 3 ia) o ras — . ;
eeu's § gg 8B g3 #
S#Eos § : 2 a sh
Bos gs g g at BH 24 2
Syguo ee & & qe wo as 2 SS PF
co = o = ° 2 2 =| a BO te
A) v se J re Go Set See Soe
5 v E 2 8 & SS & BS Cx = - oS ».@ Z
E Ao 2 a 2 68 8 8&8 3 fs GS
Fiego 2424 A 42 2 . 8 2s aw ZO ff &
seer SiS SS SS

l 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
sisi mn mesma er Ap tigi mai ani
snasemecesiniismpenae manmatmeenanayttt mmm Agi iim ememia

Prom) HO) cscs.
LO Me ssssscecssci2 i ecsswes
|. Omitted by G.S.R. 1, dated 19th December, 1997 (w.e.f. 3-1-1998).

[PAGE 89]
114 The Arms Rules, 1962
The........0f.......20.... Date on which copy is sent to the — |
(a) Secretary, Central Administration of the Dpartment
_ Government of the State of Pondicherry. :
(b) District Magistrate ...............22 Cistrict.
(c) Station Master of the ................. Railway Station .........
(d) Authority at the port of export/re-import (vide
rule 35):
The......of......20.... (Signature)
Licensing Authority .........0.:..0eceeeeee ee Designation
. CONDITIONS

1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, and of
the Arms Rules, 1962.

2. The articles shall not be conveyed by any route other than that specified in column
8 and bulk shall not be broken nor shall the consignment be stopped, before the articles reach
the place of destination.

3. An account of the contents of each package shall be legibly written thereon; and
where the articles are conveyed by rail each package shall be marked with the words "Arms"
or "Ammunition", as the case may be, so as to be readily recognisable by the railway
authorities.

4, The articles shall be delivered only to a person lawfully entitled to receive them.

3 FORM XX
Licence for the transport of arms and ammunition
I Galea
ae
ARMS AMMUNI-
TION

Net i 2 i nr Nps

= >
oom & Buy
sae & i
o & 6 =
2S ys ~ oh o
tf) ¥ Me are uw
eee £ a © 5

WV) ov “=
E26 5 5 = Z sos
Siw fi O =| o a
o = 6 S Bh = we Oo a =
a: % & = 2e +
a-e 8 Y a 8 ; Be &
Eon = § = oe BS RE 8
a 8 =i gs A © Oo 6 c's # SS 8 Bo) a 3 BOG
"aS v = =) iS oe ie Ge ie OO Oe &
ou. & 2 5) 5 oh Oo o wo 2 SB =
FEua se BY D c A ‘oS og O & 9 Qs
Soo OY & = io) ot vu eo 3g SS cs & S « t
ZA2uAh oa 2 OF 4 OF Fe AS a 42S fu 2

| 2 3 -| 5 6 7 8 9 10 1]
eS re eee Te ae ee ae ORC ee
|. Omitted by G.S.R. 1, dated 19th December, 1997 (w.e.f. 3-1-1998).

[PAGE 90]
The Arms Rules, 1962 118
From the...........
TO th@si22520.2
The,... of...... 20.......... Date on which a certificate of "no objection's" is obtained from
COMMIUSSIONET OF POUCE 5, cha ierscateisccenaqioiccmcad wnieranaracnccns
Goverment Of the State OF sciscccssaviscssasianvccsivesasvaxsvesusszsreaanesaseosecs cs
District Magistrate Of the Cistrict: ccsescsssscsavessracsnsdswasaconcanserersaeveunesns
(vide rule 50)
THi@ics OBaci 20 access Date on which a copy is sent to the District Magistrate of
SERB: cas sesavsasanusansavismensvotaezannusn se tanawanslanenbonnnen canines AiKIRRIaW CHER HRIRCOaD
Government of the State Of .......:.:2.::csscssesscecsccscsneeseseecesvasorsccencceapoavens
Ova uct Calg. dl, oi enn ee ee nn So aeen
(vide rule 38).
| (Signature)
The.... Of...0..20.0.., Licensing Authority ........0.ccccceccesccsessccececessedereeteseecessrenseeaeeereneceaeens
DJ ESER ALIGN, ....<y5 foes Uevcapatnrnsoetsansrackcon have tesatesunpehandeisunbscng pense weasonreeeesine
(SEAL) ii
CONDITIONS

1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, and
of the Arms Rules, 1962.

2. The articles shall not be conveyed by any route other than that specified in —
column 8; and bulk shall not be broken, nor shall the consignment be stopped, before
the articles.reach the place of destination:

Provided that where the consignment is ready but could not be despatched in one
bulk, for reasons beyond the control of the licensee the articles may be sent in lots
provided proper intimation is sent to the licensing authority, who may extend the time
limit in column I1, tf necessary.

3. An account of the contents of each package shall be legibly written thereon;
and where the articles are conveyed by rail, each package shall be marked with the
word "Arms" or “Ammunition" as the case may be, so as to be readily recognisable
by the railway authorities.

4. The articles shall be delivered only to a person lawfully entitled to receive
them.

5. Where a licence granted for industrial purposes have been made valid for a
period longer than the noraml period of twice the time taken journey from godown
to factory vide proviso to sub-rule (4) of rule 38, necessary entries shall promptly be
made in the stock registers maintained by the dealer for the purpose at both places
(viz. godown and factory).

[PAGE 91]
116 The Arms Rules, 1962 |
, ¢ ini |
HO eh Ze pS os 3) |
C'e & = s 8 a w —] “- oO caf wa
fei cr | = eer * * ‘—_
of Covs s : 3 ee ra |
be so OF S : :
@ 2 o of Y - ¢ pee et ©
t a =F ¢ 3 o © & |
o = oe - 3 5 U > |
a ; a A )
ces oe , bp © =
a ay, <2: aes — = o wm a a
— of ie a ad — 2 =
ba | aa!
esc | s = 2 a »
a [L, oO 6
siq |S & = 36
ca a= .
fee |2a3 ¢ 84
Z52 isf* | 3s =2
|
—_ + _ o—_ Ww cy i
* a 42:2 8 ov o 86
a” & -— 2 os ch & >, &
of & on 2 s xt = 22
bt crt | E -— & a |
a — Bie & ob) ) @
oo aA? ® s * = 0 °
sind
=| Ges ~~
A Ss o ww «Ag oS oe. 8
a8 I8$.P.3 o ES esse
Ses rt eo “4 By - O + 6 ‘
Sel = * » As KEELE
anocg wm —
svn w ie) oO > Sy See
lm i =
pe S&S © @ ce & tn pena “Ake # we
cf) © = oy ae) ,
= 228 Oo © pos “ O & £0282 at
a = 0 St wa > re Bam oo
Ogan [268 Fa° ~ o “geese. &
wm Se See (e" s © v SSe35 —
© - Cy is) bre oso 1
= ao) a — SP 8 Oo a~ :
of ses oo oS Chant Get
eet he et be oe e 4 = ©
o's So aE 2 m & = - On
o o = er sas cH Ss O
gq te mk = Net yy , —=— & aw °C
a2 |* i or Oo EN oO
“Ue 2 a ; ; —S a 0 4 Q
$= Po! SecEe «
om v : : f oc ns 2 S eae
— S o a. 8 2 oo g
sm & = wn * a6 * 3 3
s2 & 3) : : oO 4 2 2 oO a
Em > Qu Pe : Loot k ss)
™“@ © SE o's : Gata o _-
SES. l2 & PoP 8 Ree] ow
ae = : : ~ << :
a? 6. Mr hen, au lags a)
So oO
—_— fF & Sy ° ; oe 8 eo io)
sens Saw : : Oo wm lS ao
es ses : : Qo w ©
a9 & a 8 a . : = 0 YL ~
So 6. bb oO § ny : rs & i = ~
ok & * ° : : eee a ee E
ao = & tnddzee | oi

[PAGE 92]
The Arms Rules, 1962 117
Ss) ier ahs Ay
“ 00 ca
roma 2a ae one
tg Oe On a a a
=) 0o'O S's . 2 f 4
wn ‘Tem OF S : : o. ie
haa oe 2 = eh oe
J a, F ~ - 2
Mon an ae
=) > igh |a ek
s S} a a a
3 iS a ae
Cent Sm; (= ae tee ook
° — a St S Pa a8
<4 mS & ae
=| a, ‘S| a
a oa 2 we << ae a
o 2 u™ 5 ~ i
wa ww ra Silas ¢
oS mm 06 oe — = * es §
bd tee BS BS of Ove 2-08
eS ed eS i a ae
—— a oc eo 8 $
a tf ce tO
aS > © gS
i a2 oe oS :
BOR Rio® & Sy 3.
> Ss ‘
e 2 ° o3s Si. SF eg.
Frey | ra | =. = OU ct
mS = ga 5 l 2 “508
“x st 9 & es eé Sag VIA
MS og o a a a & a
a 3 aS mS So it 5 Os
=> an ovwf{sz 2 ao &
o & oa “Sl Se 2 —
Mae =m SG a 4,0 ase .
o sve |O°s a € Dp
q fe a he abd © Sen
a > e's & o° w ".* ;
o a Se a oe oe
av 2285 aad bs
| Br Ga “wo
So SES 22 » 2 O < ~
or a o am a :
) bl fo) ome a sa o
-. © =i) “ ® =I
8 << ™ &
S ‘os Set Ce a
steed = 2 Oo Q
ro © = :
= 2 ea ; ; a
oo : : ad
2) ; :
a So =) oS
FS “ “ 4
o c 4 : aia
Sent hos : : ;
9 6. | ; =:
2 oO o ; .
as! o . :
eles ; : 3 E
< *1o% : : r=
fe * | & his a
* | a ©
a co <- :
- cx = sat

[PAGE 93]
118 The Arms Rules, 1962
CONDITIONS

1. This licence is granted subject to all the provisions of the Arms Act. 1959, and
of the Arms Rules, 1962.

2. It covers only the person named, and the arms or ammunition described therein.

3. This licensee shall not, unless specially empowered in this behalf by the authority

- granting the licence, carry arms or ammunition to a fair, religious procession or other
public assemblage. |

4. The licensee shall not carry Government arms or ammunitions.

Explanation.—For the purpose of this conditions—

(a) "Government arms" means a fire-arm or other weapon which 1s the
property of Government; and

(b) "Government ammunition" means ammunition manufactured in any
Government factory, or prepared for and supplied to Government other
than such ammunition as may be released by Government for civilian
use.

5. The licensee shall, on demand by any Magistrate, police-officer, produce the
weapons covered by this licence. .

6. The licensee shall not while in India sell or transfer any arms or ammunition
covered by this licence without previous approval of the licensing authority of the
place of sale or transfer.

7. The licensee shall produce the weapon for inspection of the licensing authority
[vide rule 45(3)] at the time of leaving India and return his licence to the passprot
checking authority or other officer empowered by the District Magistrate in this behalf
at the port or other place of departure from India.

Note.—Any breach of the conditions of this licence is punishable with imprisonment

_ for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend Rs. 500,
or with both (section 30 of the Act).
'TFORM "A"] uit
Form of application for an arms licence
(See rule 51) ya
PART A
Identity of applicant
]. PDEISES ohvcreoemnonerennieshnenslcnrteranunernranacrssnstions meqennts AAU eaSES IS EA RES Aap AUNAINGAEA REO O NOSES UEHARA EEN RR
2. Father ’s/husband’S Names ...cccsissssssecesceraescsosaevecseessoonqeestenensersusesepoeeneererenenspences |
3; Place: af birth) CNatitV iis tesiscssssscayeaiccra cessansza nore icelic awawesboosuersevaae
4, Date of birth in Christian era both in words and figures ° ............e eee:
| 3. Present) AGOrOS8 9 siswscscatsiesersvecnatendrnennseiarnveriaminaienavenwaracveesimaaenreiacciianeeneaanes nes
a) INGACESE PONCE SUQUIOIE scccsiiseccescsisesesemianemannavemceu nacre mio
6. Permanent address: .........cccccreserersersececessssvetseccensenesessosthenveneneagennssesevenevescneneanessenss
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 52 (E), dated 24th January, 1989. .

[PAGE 94]
The Arms Rules, 1962 119
*%(a) Nearest. Police Statiiie.................0ssersecceesenoastnencnepserseesepeccnecsonsasesansonserasennens
7. Occupation; and designation of office, held if
any (together with address)
Signature/Thumb impression
Note.—**Nearest Police Station means the police station under whose jurisdiction
the place given in the address comes.
PARTB
Other particulars of applicant
9. Where the applicant has been—
(a) convicted if so, the offence (s), the sentence and
date of sentence;
(b) ordered to execute a bond under Chapter VIII of
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) for
keeping the peace of for good behaviour—if so,
when and for what period;
(c) prohibited under the Arms Act, 1959, or any other
_ law from having the arms/ammunition. |
10. (a) whether the applicant applied for a licence before—
if so, when, to whom and with what result; Ment
(b) whether the applicant’s licence was ever suspended
or cancelled/revoked—ifso, whenand by whomand
on what account;
(c) whether any other member of the applicant’s family
is in possession of anarms licence—ifso, particulars ek:
thereof. i 3 .
11. Whether the applicant—
(a) is a licensee or exemptee, if so, description of the
arms, held;
(b) has a safe place to keep the arms;
(c) is a bona fide tourist—if so
(i) name of the country to which he
belongs;
(ii) whether he is prohibited by the laws
of his country from having in his
possession any arms and ammunition;
(iii) the probable date of his arrival in
India,
Note.—Bona fide tourist is permitted to bring into India, subject to the conditions
specified in section 10 and in rule 32, arms and ammunition in reasonable quantities for his
use for purpose only of sport and for no other purpose.

[PAGE 95]
120 The Arms Rules, 1962
PARTC
Particulars of Licences

12. Need for licence:

13. The Form in which the licence is required:

14. Description of arms/ammunition |

15, (a) Area within which applicant wishes to carry

arms
(b) place where arms/ammunition will be kept/
manufactured, etc.
(c) Place/route of import/export/transport.
16. Other particulars required as in the relevant licence
Form.

17. Claims for special consideration.

Note.—Against column 12 the applicant should clearly

mention the purpose (s) for which the licence is required—such

as use, acquisition, possession, carrying, manufacture, sale,

transfer, repair, convert, proof-test, import, re-import, export, re-

export, self-protection, sport, display, destruction of wild animals

which do injury to human beings/cattle, protection of crops and

cattle, target practice/shooting temporary possession as bona

fide traveller visiting India, etc.

PARTD
For applicant requiring licence for import/export/transport/
re-export and re-import.
18. (a) whether the previous sanction of the
concerned authority required under rule
50 if any, has been obtained, and, if so,
(b) the evidence in support thereof. !
Declaration : |
I hereby declare that the above particulars given in the application are true, complete
and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief. I understand that in the event of any
information being found false or incorrect at any stage, I am liable to be proceeded against
and action taken under the relevant provisions of the Arms Act, 1959, the Arms Rules, 1962,
and other central enactments or the law for the time being in force.
| Signature/Thumb impression of applicant

Place:.........ceeeee > ae

j 2 a
(Note.—Strike off the entries not relevant)

Warning : Suppression of any factual information or furnishing of any
false or wrong information in the application Form in violation
of rule 51A will render the applicant liable for punishment
under section 30 of the Arms Act, 1959.]

[PAGE 96]
The Arms Rules, 1962 121
'ISCHEDULE IV
(See rule 57)
Fees payable for licences
eee eee
SI. Form No. _ Licence fee for Renewal fee for
No. initial year of grant each subsequent
(In Rs.) year (In Rs.)
| 2 3 4
a
1] 150 50
3. Il
(a) Pistols, revolvers and repeating 100 50
rifle
(b) Rifles other than those men- 60 30
tioned in (a) and (c)
(c) .22 bore rifle (low 40 20)
velocity)firing rimmed
cartridges, BL gun and air rifle .
(d) ML gun, air gun, sword, bayo- 10 05
net, dagger and spearlance |
(ec) Weapons of category V other — ae
than those mentioned in (d)
4. IIIA — —
5. HIB — —
6. IV os ~~
i OM — —
8. VI — —
(a) Pistol or Revolver 100 50
(b) Rifle other than those 60 30 ‘
mentioned in (c) 7
(c) .22 bore rifle (low velocity) 40 20
firing rimmed ctdgs. BL gun or
rifle
(d) ML gun orair-gun 10 05
9. VII 20 —~
(for each weapon)
10. VI 20 —
(for each weapon)
rh, IX 500 200
12, X .
(a) toa holder ofa licence in Form — —
IX
(b) to others 200 100
13. XI 300 200
14. XI 300 200 |
15. XIIl
(a) toaholder of alicence in Form — —
IX :
(b) For arms of Cat. V only 50 100
(c) Otherwise 100 100
16. XIV
17. XV — —
(a) Firearms and ammunition 100 (for single weapon)

. 500 in other cases (i.e. consignment of
more than one weapon and of
ammunition)

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 1, dated 19th December, 1997 (w.e.f3-1-1998).

[PAGE 97]
SS — ee ee EE ee ee SSE
AVERASE OL pO ‘
122 The Arms Rules, 1962 Date... Ze /s [o4...... |
1 2 3 4
(b) Arms of Cat. V (where a licence 50 (for single weapon) ; |
is required) 100 in other cases (i.e. consignment of !
more than one weapon and of ammu- |
(c) For sulphur imported under nition)
Rule 57(5) - wn |
18. XVI |
(a) Firearms and ammunition 100 (for single weapon)
500 in other cases (i.e. consignment of
more than one weapon and of ammunition) |
(b) Arms of Cat. V 50 (for single weapon ) |
100 in other cases (i.e. consignment of |
more than one weapon and of ammu- |
nition) |
19. XVII |
-(a) Firearms and ammunition 100 (for single weapon) |
500 in other cases (i.e. consignment of |
more than one weapon and of ammunition)
(b) Arms of Cat. V 50 (for single weapon)
100 in other cases (i.e. consignment of
more than one weapon and of ammunition)
20, XVIII
(a) Firearms and ammunition 100 (for single weapon)
500 in other cases (i.e. consignment of
more than one weapon and of ammunition)
(b) Arms of Cat. V 50 (for single weapon)
100 in other cases (i.e. consignment of
| more than one weapon and of ammunition)
21, MIX
(a) Firearms and ammunition 100 (for single weapon)
500.in other cases (i.e. consignment of
more than one weapon and of ammunition)
(b) Arms of Cat. V 50 (for single weapon)
100 in other cases (/.e. consignment of
_ more than one weapon and of ammunition)
(c) For re-export and re-import 50 (for single weapon)
under rule 35. . $00 in other cases (i.e. consignment of
more than one weapon and of ammunition).
22, XX
(a) Firearms and ammunition 100 (for single weapon)
500 in other cases (i.e. consignment of
more than one weapon and of ammunition) :
(b) Arms of Cat. V 50 (forsingle weapon)
100 in other cases (i.e. consignment of
more than one weapon and of ammunition)
(c) Where the arms or ammunition 50 (for single weapon)
are transported for re-export 100 in other cases (i.e. consignment of
and re-import under rule 35 more than one weapon and of ammunition)
23. XxX!I — —
24. XXiIl 50 (for each weapon). |