[PAGE 1]
llIG ll COURT OF DELI II : NEW DELlll
No. 68/1T Cell/DllC
Dated: 30-07-2026

P U B 1. 1 C N o ’r 1 C E

It is hereby informed to all concerned that the 'e-Inspection Application’ of Delhi
lligh Court has been updated to discontinue the e-file downloading feature and1 with effect
from 01.08.2026, after successful processing & approval of e-Inspection applications (as per
the extant rules/guidelines/orders/directions) by the concerned Inspection Branch(es)s an
+ email will be sent to the concerned Advocates/Litigants at their registered email IDs and the
concerned Advocates/Litigants can view the e-file/records for five days after login in the e-
Inspection portal of Delhi High Court in their inbox.
Accordingly. the 'Instructions for availing Online e-Inspection of Digitized Judicial
Files’, issued by this Court, vidc No. 1 63/1T Cell/DllC dated 21.01.2023, shall be deemed to
be modified to the above-mentioned extent
Sd/-
(RAJEEV KUMAR CHAUHAN)
REGISTRAR (IT)
for Registrar General

Endst. No. 12743-12757/1T Cell/DHC Dated: 30-07-2026
Copy forwarded for information to:
(i.) The Registrar-cum-Secretary to Hon'ble the Chief Justice.
(ii.) All the Registrars/OSDs/Joint Registrars (Judicial).
(iii.) The Joint Registrar-cum-PA to worthy Registrar General.
(iv.) The Joint Registrar (J) (Rules) for furthcr action, if any.
(v.) All the Private Secretaries and Court Masters a/w thc IIon’ble Judges.
(vi.) The Secretary, Bar Council of India, 21, Rouse Avenue Institutional Area, New Delhi
(vii.) The Secretary, Bar Council of Delhi. 2/6, Siri Fort Institutional Area, Khel Gaon Marg,
New Delhi - 1 10049
(viii.) The llony. Secretary, Supreme Court Bar Association, Supreme Court of India, New
Delhi
(iX.) The Hony. Secretary, Delhi High Court Bar Association, Delhi High Court, New Delhi.
(X.) The Hony. Secretaries, Bar Associations, Tis Hazari Courts Complex, Patiala House
Courts Complex. Rouse Avenue Courts Complex, Karkardooma Courts Complex,
Rohini Courts Complex, Dwarka Courts Complex & Sakct Courts Complex.
(xi.) PA to Registrar (IT) with a request to upload this Public Notice on the website and
Intranet of this Court.
(xii.) PA to Registrar (Listing) with a request to send this Public Notice via email to the
Advocates and also publish the same in the Cause List for one week.
(xiii.) Director (IT), Delhi Iligh Coun for compliance.
(xiv.) AOJ (Inspection Original), AOJ (Inspection Appellate-I) & AC)J (Inspection Appellate-
II) for colnpliance.
(xv.) Guard Filc.

} I L IE) 1b Ii
( s I I A : E E LIi?:=Pg #
JOINT RE(;ISI-lb\

M dKT,WA/ F&zac get UP££wfed
P 'hq

[PAGE 2]
HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI

No. 163/IT CelllDHC Dated: 21.01.2023

Instruction For Availing Online e-inspection of Digitized Judicial Files

Preface

1. The purpose of these instructions is to enable the applicants to seek
online inspection of digitized judicial files through the e-inspection
portal in addition to the existing facility ofproviding physical inspection.

2. The directions issued concerning inspection via judicial orders and
. judgments will continue to apply to the extent relevant to e-inspection.
Instructions

3. To avail of the online e-inspection facility, the link of the e-inspection
portal available on the home page of the official website of Delhi High
Court, i.e., www.delhihighcourt.nic.in, as well as in the official Mobile
App is required to be opened.
4. Any Advocate/litigant, who has registered his/her mobile phone number
on the e-filing portal of the High Court of Delhi, can log into the e
inspection portal by providing the registered mobile number and having
the same validated via One Time Passwords (OTPs) sent on the
registered mobile number and e-mail ID.
5. However, a new applicant will have to gethimself/herselfregistered with
the e-filing portal before logging into the e-inspection portal.
6. Once logged in, the applicant will have to provide details as sought by
the online application form.
7. The online application form will be accompanied by an inspection fee of
Rs.5/- by making an entry in the relevant box/table, of the number of the

[PAGE 3]
e-court fee purchased from the website of Stock Holding Corporation of
India Limited.
8. Upon completion of the aforesaid steps online application form can be
submitted.
9. To check the inbox of applications for e-inspections, the concerned
officers/officials of the Inspection Branch will access the e-Inspection
portal through the intranet link and log into the portal by using their
respective U sernames & passwords.
10. Upon scrutiny, if the details given in the online inspection application are
found correct, the concerned Officer/official of the Inspection Branch
will accept the online inspection application and upload the entire
digitized judicial file in PDF format on the portal by using the 'Upload'
button, except the records, papers, documents, and things or matter
prohibited for inspections or ordered to be kept as confidential by the
Hon'ble Court/Authority.
11. In case the size of the PDF file to be uploaded is large, the concerned
Officer/official of the Inspection Branch will split the PDF file into
multiple PDF files and then upload all such PDF files.
12. After acceptance of the online inspection application and uploading of
the digitized file, an email will be sent to the concerned Advocate/litigant
at the registered email address containing the link to the relevant PDF
file(s) for online inspection. To open the link the applicant would have to
key in the password received on the registered mobile phone number.
13. The email sent to the applicant would contain a Disclaimer Clause that
this is a confidential court document(s)/ file(s) meant only for the stated
personal use of the applicant and hence cannot be transmitted to a third
party. The same shall not be shared in the public domain. If this e-mail is

[PAGE 4]
not meant for you, please do not download it, and if downloaded, the
same should be deleted, failing which legal consequences may follow.
14. The PDF file link sent to the applicant for e-inspection will remain active
for five [5] days only.
15. If the online inspection application is found incorrect/incomplete, the
concerned Officer/official of the Inspection Branch will reject the
application with appropriate observation. An email in this regard will
also be sent to the concerned Advocate/litigant at the registered e-mail
address.
16. The inspection fee will be locked only if the online inspection application
is accepted by the concerned Officer/official of the Inspection Branch.
17. The online inspection application will be processed by the concerned
Inspection Branch ordinarily within three [3] working days, excluding the
day when the application is lodged.
18. The e-inspection application form will be received up to 1600 hours on
any court working day. Any application filed after 1600 hours on any
working day or filed on any non-working day, will be treated as having
been filed on the date which follows the actual filing date provided it is a
court working day.
19. These instructions shall come into force w.e.f. 25 th January, 2023.

By Order,

Sd/

(RA VINDER DUDEJA)
REGISTRAR GENERAL

[PAGE 5]
..

Esst. No.1863-85/IT CellJDHC Dated: 21.01.2023

1. All Principal District & Sessions judges, Delhi.
2. The Principal Judge, Family Courts (Hq), Dwarka Courts Complex, New Delhi.
3. The Secretary, Bar Council of India, New Delhi.
4. The Secretary, Bar Council of Delhi, New Delhi.
5. The Secretary, Supreme Court of India Bar As.sociation, New Delhi.
6. The Secretary, Delhi High Court Bar Association, New Delhi.
7. The Member Secretary, Delhi Legal Services Authority (DLSA), Patiala House
Court, New Delhi.
8. The Member Secretary, Delhi High Court Legal Services Committee, Delhi High
Court, New Delhi.
9. The Secretary, Delhi Bar Association, Tis Hazari, Delhi.
10. The Secretary, Delhi Bar Association, New Delhi Courts, New Delhi.
11. The Secretary, Delhi Bar Association, Karkardooma Courts, New Delhi.
12. The Secretary, Delhi Bar Association, Rohini Courts, New Delhi.
13. The Secretary, Delhi Bar Association, Dwarka Courts, New Delhi.
14. The Secretary, Delhi Bar Association, Saket Courts, New Delhi.
15. Registrar-cum-Secretary to Hon'ble the Chief Justice/All Registrars/OSDs/
Coordinator (DIAC).
16. All Joint Registrars/Deputy Registrars/Director(IT)/Assistant Registrars/
Deputy Controller of Accounts/Assistant Registrar (Library)/Joint Director (IT).
17. The Joint Registrar, Registrar General's Secretariat.
18. Private Secretaries of all Hon'ble Judges.
19. Court Masters of all Hon'ble Judges.
20. All Admn. Officers (Judicial)lBranch In-charge/Librarian.
21. Joint Director (IT) with the request to upload the Office Order on the website
of this Court.
22. Copy to be displayed on the Notice Board.
23. Guard File.

~IIDI/a~g
(Rajeev Kumar Chauhan)
Joint Registrar (IT)