[PAGE 1]
THE REGISTRATION OF FOREIGNERS
RULES, 1992!

Whereas the draft of the Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1990 in supersession of the
Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1939 were published, as required by section 3 of the
Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 (16 of 1939) in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary,
Part II, Section 3, sub-section (i) dated 15th January, 1991 under the Notification of the
Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs No. G.S.R. 37(E), dated 15th
January, 1991, inviting objections and suggestions from all persons likely to be affected
thereby, within a period of 45 days from the date of publication of that notification in the
Official Gazette.

Anp, Wuereas the copies of the said Official Gazette were made available to the
public on the 15th January, 1991;

Anp, Wuereas no objections and suggestions on the said draft have been received,
from the persons likely to be affected thereby by the Central Government;

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by section 3 of the said Act *[and
in supersession of the Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1939, except as respects things
done or omitted to be done before such supersession,] the Central Government hereby
makes the following rules °[***], namely:—

1. Short title, commencement and extent.—(1) These rules may be called the
Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992.

2. They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official
Gazette.

3. They extend to the whole of India.

2. Definitions.—In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant to the
subject or context—

(a) “Act” means the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 (16 of 1939);

(b) “Certificate of Registration” means a certificate of Registration issued
in pursuance of rules;

_ (c) “Master of the Vessel” includes the pilot of an Aircraft and any
person authorised by such master or pilot to discharge on his behalf
any of the duties imposed upon him by these rules;

(d) “Form” means one of the Forms appended to these rules;

(e) “Passenger” means any person travelling or seeking to travel on
vessel who is not a bona fide seaman;

(f) “Registered Address” means a foreigner’s address in India as
reported under rule 6 and recorded in item 11 of his Certificate’ of
Registration;

1. Vide G.S.R. 318 (E), dated 19th March, 1992, published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt. U,

Sec. 3 (i), dated 19th March, 1992;
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 55 (E), dated 29th January, 1999 (w.e.f. 29-1-1999).
3. The words “further to amend the Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1939” omitted by G.S.R.
55 (E), dated 29th January, 1999 (w.e-f. 29-1-1999).

[PAGE 2]
The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992 25

(g) “Registration Officer” means a Registration Officer appointed by the
Central Government under rule 3 and includes an authority
authorised in writing by a Registration Officer with the approval of
the Central Government to perform the duties of the Registration
Officer on his behalf;

(h) “Residence” means ordinary dwelling place in India;

(i) “Seaman” means a person employed on, or engaged in the working
of a vessel;

(j) “Tourist” means a foreigner having no residence or occupation in
India whose stay in India does not ordinarily exceed six months, who
has no other object in visiting India than recreation, sightseeing or
attending, in a representative capacity, meetings convened by the
Government of India or International bodies or any other meeting or
conference cleared by the Government of India;

(k) “Vessel” includes aircraft but does not include a vessel travelling
solely between ports or places in India.

3. Registration Officers—(1) The Central Government may appoint
Registration Officers for the purposes of these rules for such areas as it thinks fit.

(2) A Registration Officer may, with the approval of the Central Government,
authorise in writing any authority to perform any or all of his functions under

these rules.

4. Passengers on vessels to report arrival in India.—Every passenger who
arrives in India on board any vessel shall on being required so to do by or on
behalf of, the master of the vessel, furnish true particulars as to his name and
nationality, his age, sex, place of birth, and address or intended address in India,
the purpose of his visit and the proposed length of his stay in India.

5. Report by foreigners on arrival in and departure from India by land.—
Every foreigner who enters or leaves India by land shall, on being required so to
do by the Registration Officer of the place of arrival or departure, as the case may
be, furnish to him a true statement of the particulars set out in Form D.

6. Report by a foreigner of his address in India, etc.—(1) Every foreigner
entering India or resident in India shall present in person or through an
authorised representative to the appropriate Registration Officer specified in rule
7, a report (hereinafter referred to as a registration report) within the time
specified in that rule: —.

Provided that no such report shall be necessary in the case of a foreigner who
enters India on a visa valid for a period of not more than one hundred and eighty .
days and who does not remain in India beyond the said period. “

(2) Every registration report shall be made in writing in English or in Hindi
language and in quadruplicate and shall contain a-true statement of the
foreigner’s address in India and of the other particulars specified in Items 2 to 10
in Para IV of Form A and such of the particulars specified in items 12 to 16
thereof, as may be appropriate.

[PAGE 3]
26 The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992
(3) For the purpose of sub-rule (2), a foreigner’s address in India shall be—
(a) the place of his residence; or
(b) if he has no residence, the place at which, at the time of making his
registration report he is for the time being living or at which he first
intends to live after his arrival in India.

Provided that, subject to the approval of the Registration Officer, any foreigner
who has no residence in India may, with the consent previously obtained of an
Indian citizen residing in India, being a banker or a person having the
management of hotel or of a tourist or travel agency, report as his address in India
the name and address of the said Indian citizen and such name and address shall,
for so long as the provisions of sub-rule (4) are complied with, be deemed to be
the foreigner’s address in India:

Provided further that in the case of a foreigner who has no residence in India,
whose occupation is such as to necessitate frequent travelling, who is not likely
to return within a reasonable time to the district in which he is at any time living _
and who is unable to avail himself of the provisions of the foregoing proviso, the
office of the Registration Officer of the district in which he has first registered upon
his arrival in India shall be deemed to be his address in India.

(4) In any case to which the proviso to sub-rule (3) applies, it shall be the
duty,—

(a) of the foreigner to keep the Indian citizen informed of his current
address; and

(b) of the Indian citizen to furnish all such information in his possession
relating to the foreigner as may be demanded for any of the purposes
of the Act or of these rules by any Registration Officer, Magistrate or
Police Officer not below the rank of head constable.

(5) Copies of Form A may be obtained on application from any Registration
Officer.

7. Procedure for Registration.—(1) The registration report shel be presented—

(a) in the case of a foreigner who enters India on a visa valid for a stay
in India for a period of one hundred and eighty days or less and who
wishes to stay in India beyond a period of one hundred and eighty
days, to the Registration Officer having jurisdiction in the place where
the said foreigner is present at the time of presentation of such report;

(b) in the case of foreigner who enters India on a visa valid for a stay in
India for a period of more than one hundred eighty days to such
Registration Officer as may be specified in this behalf by the
Registration Officer of the port or other place of arrival with the
approval of the Central Government; gst

(c) in the case of foreigner, who enters India otherwise than on a visa, to
the Registration Officer having jurisdiction in the place where the said
foreigner is present at the time of the presentation of such report;

(d) in the case of a person who has become a foreigner by reason of his
having ceased to be a citizen of India while resident in India to the
Registration Officer having jurisdiction in the place where the said
person is ordinarily resident;

[PAGE 4]
The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992 27

1{(e) in the case of a foreigner who enters India with a persons of Indian

Origin Card, to the Registration Officer having jurisdiction in the place
where the said foreigner is ordinarily resident.
Explanation.—In this clause, the expression “Person of Indian Origin”
means a person who is a foreign citizen of Indian Origin settled
outside India and to whom such card has been issued by the Central
Government, subject to such conditions, as it may specify in thisbehalf;]

2[(f) in the case of a foreigner who enters India on a visa valid for a stay
in India for a period of more than one hundred and eighty days with
a stipulation that ‘each stay shall not exceed one hundred and eight
days’, and who wishes to stay in India beyond the period of one
hundred and eighty days on any single occasion; to the Registration
Officer having jurisdiction in the place where the said foreigner is
present at the time of presentation of such report.]

(2) The Registration report shall be presented—

(a) in the case of a foreigner referred to in clause (a) of sub-rule (1), within
two weeks after the expiry of one hundred and eight days of his
arrival in India;

(b) in the case of foreigner referred to in clause (b) of sub-rule (1), within
two weeks of his arrival in India;

(c) in the case of a foreigner referred to in clause (c) of sub-rule (1),
immediately after the expiry of the authorised period of stay in India;

(d) in the case of foreigner referred to in clause (d) of sub-rule (1), within
fifteen days of his ceasing to be citizen of India.

‘[(e) in the case of a foreigner referred to in clause (e) of sub-clause (1),
within thirty days after the expiry of the period of one hundred and
eighty days of his arrival in India;]

7[(f)_ in the case of a foreigner referred to in clause (f) of sub-rule (1), any
time before the expiry of the period of one hundred and eighty days
of his arrival in India.]

Explanation.—For the purpose of sub-rule (1) and sub-rule (2), the date on
which the person concerned shall be deemed to have ceased to be a citizen of India
shall be-—

(a) where he has voluntarily acquired the citizenship of another country
by naturalisation or registration, the date of such naturalisation or
registration;

(b) where he has obtained a passport from the Government of any other country, the date on which such passport was obtained: -

Provided that in the case of a person in respect of whom an order has been
made under sub-section (2) of section 9 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955),

1. Ins. by G.S.R. 483 (E), dated Ist July, 1999 (w.e.f. 1-7-1999).
2. Ins. by G.S.R. 70 (E), dated 30th January, 2002 (w.e.f. 31-1-2002).

[PAGE 5]
28 The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992
holding that, he had acquired the citizenship of a foreign country such date shall
be the date of the order aforesaid.

(3) Every foreigner presenting a registration report shall furnish to the
Registration Officer such information as may be in his possession for the purpose
of satisfying the said officer as to the accuracy of the particulars specified therein
and shall, on being required to do sign the registration report in the presence of
the said officer and shall thereupon be entitled to receive from the said officer a
certificate of registration in Part III of Form A:

Provided that, in any case in which the registration report is presented, in
accordance with clause (b) of sub-rule (1) by a foreigner whose address in India
is not within the jurisdiction of the Registration Officer of the port or other place
of arrival in India, temporary certificate in Form B shall be issued and the said
foreigner shall thereafter comply with the conditions set out in Form B:

Provided further that any foreigner whose passport or other documents of
identification do not, in the opinion of the Registration Officer, provide adequate
proof of identity, shall be required to furnish to the Registration Officer, within
such period of presenting his registration report as such officer may fix, either four
copies of a photograph of himself of passport size, one of which shall be affixed
to Part III of Form A and over stamped with the Stamp of Registration Officer or
four complete sets of his finger impressions, one of which shall be made on Part
Ill of Form A, whichever the Registration Officer may require. The finger
impressions shall be made in the presence of the Registration Officer and each set
attested by him.

8. Period of validity of. certificate of registration—The certificate of
registration issued in respect of any foreigner shall be valid for so long as the
foreigner does not depart from India.

9. Production of proof of Identity.—(1) Every foreigner shall within twentyfour hours of demand being made of him by any Registration Officer, magistrate
or police officer, not below the rank of a head constable, produce, at such place
as may be specified in his passport or such other proof of his identity as may be
required for any purpose connected with the enforcement of these rules:

Provided that the said Registration Officer, magistrate or police officer may, on
sufficient cause being shown, extend the aforesaid period of twenty-four hours to
such period as, in the circumstances, may be necessary for the production of the
said passport or other proof of identity.

(2) Every Foreigner entering India shall, on demand being made of him by the
Registration Officer, deliver his passport or other proof of identity to that officer
and shall thereafter attend at such time and place as the Registration Officer may
direct for the purpose of receiving back his passport.

(3) Where in pursuance of sub-rule (2), a foreigner surrenders his passport or
other proof of identity he shall be entitled to receive a receipt for it from the
Registration Officer.

10. Production of certificate of registration.—Every registered foreigner shall,
within twenty-four hours of demand being made of him by any Registration
Officer, any magistrate or any police officer not below the rank of a head constable,
produce or cause to be produced his certificate of registration for his inspection of
such registration officer, magistrate or police officer:

[PAGE 6]
The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992 29

Provided that the Registration Officer, magistrate or police officer may, on
sufficient cause being shown, extend the aforesaid period of twenty-four hours to
such period as, in the circumstances may be reasonably necessary for the
production of the said certificate:

Provided further that if the Registration Officer, magistrate or police officer, not
being below the rank of an Inspector is of the opinion that the passport or other
documents of identification produced by the foreigner do not furnish adequate
proof of identity and if the registration certificate does not bear the photograph or
finger impressions required by the second proviso to sub-rule (3) of rule 7 the
Registration Officer, magistrate or police officer not being below the rank of an
Inspector may require the foreigner either to produce, four copies of a photograph
of himself of passport size, one of which shall be affixed to the registration
certificate and over stamped with the stamp of the officer or to furnish four
complete sets of his finger impressions one of which shall be made on the
registration certificate. The finger impression shall be made in the presence of the
Registration Officer and each set attested by him.

11. Report of absence from address.—(1) If at any time a foreigner proposes
to be absent from his registrered address for a continuous period of eight weeks
or more or he is changing his registered address or he is finally departing from
India, he shall, before he leaves, inform in person or through an authorised
representative or by registered post his Registration Officer of his intention to leave
either temporarily or permanently the jurisdiction of the Registration Officer. In
case he is returning he should inform the Registration Officer of the date of return
and in the case he is moving away, the change of address. ‘Any changes made
subsequently should also be intimated to the Registration Officer:

Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall apply in the case of any foreigner
in respect of whom, in pursuance of the proviso to sub-rule (3) of rule 6, the
address of Indian citizen is deemed to be his registered address.

(2) Every foreigner, who stays for a period of more than eight weeks at any
place in any district other than the district in which his registered address is
situated, shall inform the Registration Officer of that district of his presence.

(3) The information required under sub-rule (2) may be made in writing and
the requirements of the said sub-rule shall be deemed to have been fulfilled if, prior
to his arrival in a district other than that in which his registered address is
situated, the foreigner furnishes to the Registration Officer of the said district
intimation of the dates of his proposed arrival in and departure from the said
district.

12. Change in Registered address.—A foreigner shall be deemed to have
changed his registered address—

(a) if he departs from India; .
(b) if he changes his residence from one place to another place in India;”
(c) if having no residence, he leaves his registered address knowing that

he is not likely thereafter to return thereto within six months of leaving

it; or

[PAGE 7]
30 The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992
(a) in any case to which the first proviso to sub-rule (3) of rule 6 applies,
if either he or the Indian citizen whose address is deemed to be his
registered address applies to the Registration Officer to be absolved
from or fails at any time to discharge the obligations laid down upon
them by sub-rule (4) of that rule:

Provided that clause (c) of this rule shall not apply in any case in which in
accordance with the second proviso to sub-rule (3) of rule 6 the foreigner’s
registered address is the office of the Registration Officer of the district in which
he first registered upon his arrival in India.

13. Reports of change other than of address.—Without prejudice to the
provisions of rules 11 and 12 every foreigner shall furnish to the Registration
Officer of the district in which his registered address is situated particulars of any
circumstances affecting in any manner the accuracy of the particulars recorded in
his certificate of registration within fourteen days after the circumstance has
occurred, and generally shall supply to the Registration Officer all such
information as may be necessary for maintaining the accuracy of the certificate.

14. Report to be made to and by hotel keepers.—(1) Every keeper of a hotel

shall require every visitor to the hotel to furnish the particulars necessary for
recording, and sign, on his arrival at the hotel, his name and nationality in a
register maintained for the purpose in Form F and, if any such visitor is a foreigner
shall further require him;
(a) on his arrival at such a hotel to furnish the other particulars specified
in Items 4 to 10 of the said register; and
(b) at the time of his departure from such a hotel to furnish the particulars
necessary for recording in the said register, the date and time of his
departure and the address to which he is proceeding.

(2) The register prescribed by sub-rule (1) shall at all time be made available
for inspection, on the demand of any Registration Officer, any magistrate or any
police officer not below the rank of head constable. :

(3) Every visitor to any hotel shall, on being required so to do by the keeper
of the hotel, furnish the particulars necessary for recording, and sign, his name
and nationality, in the register referred to in sub-rule (1), and if such visitor is a
foreigner, shall also—

(a) on his arrival at such a hotel furnish the other particulars specified
in Items 4 to 10 of the said register; and

(b) at the time of his departure from such hotel, furnish the particulars
necessary for recording, in the said register, the date and time of his
departure and the address to which he is proceeding.

(4) Every particulars, other than the signature of the keeper of a hotel or a
visitor, which is required by this rule to be recorded in the said regfSter shall be
recorded by the keeper of the hotel and in the English language, if he is so able,
or otherwise, in an Indian language.

(5) If a visitor does not understand the English language it shall be duty of the
keeper of the hotel, if so requested to explain to the visitor the requirements of this
rule and Form F.

[PAGE 8]
The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992 31

(6) The keeper of the hotel shall, as soon as may be but not more than twenty-

four hours, after the arrival of any foreigner, transmit a copy of Form C, duly

completed from the particulars furnished by such a foreigner, to the Registration
Officer.

(7) For the purpose of this rule —

(a) “hotel” includes any boarding-house, club, dak-banglow, rest house,
paying guest house, sarai or other premises of like nature;

(b) “keeper of a hotel” means the person having the management of a
hotel and includes any person authorised by him, and competent to
perform the duties of the keeper of the hotel under this rule;

(c) “sign” includes, in respect of a visitor who is unable to write, the
making of a thumb impression or other mark by means of which he
is accustomed to attest a document; and

~-(d) “visitor” means a person for whom accommodation is provided at a
hotel.

(8) Copies of Form C may be obtained, on application from any Registration
Officer.

15. Surrender of certificates of registration on departure.—(1) Every foreigner
who is about to depart finally from India shall surrender his certificate of
registration either to the Registration Officer of the place where he is registered or
of the place from where he intends to depart or to the Immigration Officer at the
Port/Checkpost of exit from India.

If the certificate is surrendered other than to the Immigration Officer of the port
or checkpost of exit, a receipt indicating such surrender of the document may be
obtained and shown to the Immigration Officer.

(2) Every passenger other than a passenger for whom a berth has been engaged by or on behalf of Government, who is about to depart from India on board any
vessel shall, on the request of a person having the engagement of such vessel,
furnish or cause to be furnished in writing a true statement of the particulars set
out in Form D.

'[(3) the Central Government shall, publish on the reverse of Form D, by way
of General or Special instructions, the requirements of any other law or the rules
made thereunder, which are applicable to the passengers.]

16. Obligation of masters of vessels, etc.—(1) The master or the person having
management of any vessel arriving at or leaving any place in India shall—

(a) require any person who intends to disembark from or embark on any
such vessel for the purpose of entering or leaving India, to furnish in
writing a true statement of the particulars set out in Form D, as the _
case may be; -

(b) cause Form D to be delivered to the Registration Officer at the place
of arrival or departure;

1. Ins. by GS.R. 55 (E), dated 29th January, 1999 (w.e.f. 29-1-1999).

[PAGE 9]
32 The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992

(c) take steps to ensure that no foreigner disembarks or embarks until
authorised so to do by the Registration Officer;

(a) if so requested by the Registration Officer require any foreign
passenger about to depart from India to surrender his certificate of
registration and deliver such certificate to Registration Officer;

(e) if so required by the Registration Officer, furnish on arrival at the said
place a true statement in writing showing the name and nationality
of every seaman employed on such vessel, and at the time of departing
from such place take such steps as the Registration Officer may specify
to ascertain whether or not any such seaman as aforesaid who is a
foreigner is about to depart on board such vessel; and

(f) generally render to the Registration Officer such assistance as he may
reasonably require for carrying out the purpose of the Act and these
rules.

(2) The master or the person having the management of any vessel arriving at,
or leaving any place in India by Sea shall also furnish, before any passenger
disembarks or embarks, to the Registration Officer of any such place, a passenger
manifest in Form E.

(3) Every particular, other than the signature of a foreign passenger, which is
required by this rule to be recorded in Form D, as the case may be, shall be
recorded;

(a) if the passenger is able to write in English language, by the passenger

and in the English language;
(b) if the passenger is unable to write in English language, by the
passenger in an Indian language; or

(c)_ if the passenger is unable to write either in English language or in an
Indian language by the master of the vessi or by any person having
the management of such vessel or by any seaman euthorised in this
behalf by such master or person, in the English language or in an
Indian language.

(4) If a foreign passenger does not understand the English language or Indian
language it shall be the duty of the master of the vessel, if so requested, to explain
to the foreign passenger the requirement of this rule.

(5) Form E shall be completed in the English language or in an Indian
language.

(6) Copies of Forms D and E may be obtained, on application from any
Registration Officer. '

17. Duplicate certificate of registration—If any certificate of registration,
issued under these rules is lost or destroyed, the foreigner to whom it was issued,
shall make or send to the Registration Officer of the district of his registered
address a report of circumstances in which it was so lost or destroyed together
with an application in writing for the issue of a duplicate copy of the certificate
of registration.

[PAGE 10]
The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992 33
FORMS
FORM A
(Rule 6)
(To be completed in quadruplicate)
Part I—Registration report.
Part Il—Duplicate registration report.
Part III.—Certificate of registration (vide rules 2, 5, 6, 7, 9, 12, 13, 15, 16 and 17).
Part IV. Triplicate of registration report.
1. Serial Number.
2. Name in full (block capitals, surname first).
3. SOX. rere HeIGhte wesseessseerneeColour of CVO ered scherenepecases
4. Date and place of birth.
5. Present nationality.
6. Previous nationality (if any).
7. Manner and date of acquiring present nationality.
8. Occupation or profession, and purpose of visiting India.
9. If a member of any country’s naval, military or air-force, or its reserves, state
which country’s and rank held.
10. Number, date and office of issue of passport or particulars of other proof of
identity.
11. Address or intended address in India.
12. Post or place of embarkation or departure for India.
13, Date and place of arrival in India.
14. Name of vessel on which or how arrived in India.
15. Address of last residence outside India.
16. Name of hushand/wife and children and their nationalities (if accompanying
the visitor). ;
17. Signature of registree.
18. Date of expiry of registration.
(only for tourists)!
(Signed): Asvsssceteesss
(Seal)
Signed
(Registration Officer)
REBISECLEM A ....---.ecerssrsesseemveresnnseec id iY Los Dor tah. SOO DO.
1. As per Hindi version.

[PAGE 11]
34 The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992

Registration transferred to:
eee

District Date Signature and seal of Registration
Officer of district in column I
a
Q) (2) (3)

Mi.

2.

S. ;

4.

NOTICE

1. Every registered foreigner is required:

(1) On the demand of any Registration Officer or Magistrate or any police officer
not below the rank of head constable to produce this Certificate and his
passport or such other proof of identity as may be required of him by such
Magistrate or officer.

(Il) To surrender his certificate of registration, if he is about to depart finally from
India either to the Registration Officer of the place where he is registered or
of the place from where he intends to depart or to the Immigration Officer at
the port/checkpost of exit from India.

(111) To intimate in person or through an authorised representative or by post
under certificate of posting the Registration Officer of the district in which his
registered address is situated—

(a) before he leaves his registered address, if he proposes to be absent from
his registered address for a continuous period of eight weeks or more, the
address or addresses at which he proposes to stay and the date on which
he expects to return to his registered adddress.

(b) if he proposes to change his registered address or to leave India, the
particulars of his new address and the date of the proposed change or
departure; and .

(c) any circumstances which in any way affect the accuracy of any of the
particulars set out in his Certificate of Registration.

(IV) if he stays for more than eight weeks at any place (other than a hotel or other
premises where travellers are accommodated) in any district other than district
in which his registered address is situated to report his presence in that other
district to the Registration Officer thereof within seven days of his arrival.

(2) Failure to comply with the foregoing provisions will render the holder of this

certificate liable to be punished with imprisonment or fine or both, under section 5 of the
Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 (XVI of 1939).
FORM B oe
Temporary Certificate of Registration 7
(Rule 7)
Serial Numbet...........:+00+
Mrwecccccecccnad foreigner of............nationality who arrived in India on
tHe cecccccssssssssssssess-20.e1...i8 directed to report to the ...........at........within seven days for the
purpose’ of registration.

[PAGE 12]
The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992 35

2. For a period of one week or until the report prescribed above has been made,
whichever, is less, this Form will be deemed to be a Certificate of Registration in Part
Il of Form A and must be produced on the demand of any Registration Officer,
Magistrate, or police officer not below the rank of head constable.

3. If for any reason that report prescribed in paragraph I cannot be made within one
week the holder of this Form is directed to report in person at the office of the
undersigned or of the nearest Registration Officer and to comply with such directions as
to registration as may then be given.

4. The contents of this Form have been explained to the holder thereof.

(Signed)
Registration Officer
FORM C
(Rule 14)
Hotel Arrival Report
(To be completed in duplicate)
1. Name of hotel.
2. Name of foreign visitor.
: (in full in block capitals, surname first).
3. Nationality.
4. Number, date and place of issue of passport.
5. Address in India.
6. Date of arrival in India.
7. Arrived from.
8. Whether employed in India— Yes or No.
9. Proposed duration of stay in India.
10. Number, date and office of issue of certificate of registration, if any.
Manager’s signature
FORM D
(See rules 5 and 15)

ARRIVAL (DISEMBARKATION) CARD FOR FOREIGN NATIONALS
Please write in CAPITALS only. One character in one box as shown below.
Do not write across the lines. Leave a box blank for space
fATs[clole]i[2]3]s[ 5]

la. Name (as in passport) Leave one box blank after every part of the name/initial)

i i al Fk ss in Ol ih
lb. Sex (put ‘YW’ in box) 2. Nationality

Male [_] Female [_] PTT Creer. |
3a. Date of birth (DD/MM/YY) 3b. Country of birth

CITT) a seo

1. Subs. by G.S.R. 828 (E), dated 20th October, 2003 (w.e.f. 21-10-2003).

[PAGE 13]
36 The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992
4a. Passport Number 4b. Date of issue (DD/MM/YY)
4c. Place of issue “a and ace
5a. Date of Arrival (DD/MM/YY) 5b. Flight Number 5c. Port of Boarding
6a. Visa Number 6b. Date of issue (DD/MM/YY)
6c. City of issue 6d. Date of Expiry (DD/MM/YY)
7. Occupation (put ‘/’ in appropriate box)
Doctor Business Employed Media Lawyer Government Sports Person Other
8. Purpose of visit (put ‘W’ in appropriate box)
Tourism Business Transit Official Employment Education Conference Social Med Treatrnent Other
9. Countries visited in last 6 days
10. Address in India & Tel contact No. IMMIGRATION STAMP (ARRIVAL)
Signature of the passenger
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTURE (EMBARKATION) CARD
FOR FOREIGN NATIONALS
1a. Name (as in passport) Leave one box blank afetr every part of the name/initial)
1b. Sex (put ‘/’ in box) 2. Nationality
Male [_] Female [_] [TC Ed

[PAGE 14]
The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992 37
3. Passport Number 4. Date of birth (DD/MM/YY)
5a. Date of departure (DD/MM/YY) 5b. Flight Number _ 5c. Port of destination
-s- er — — — FOLD HERES — — — — — — —
| Signature of passenger |
IMMIGRATION STAMP (ARRIVAL) rene STAMP (DEPARTURE)
ON ARRIVAL HAND OVER THIS PART OF THE CARD TO THE CUSTOM
OFFICER IN INDIA WHILE LEAVING THE AIRPORT/CHECKPOST
CUSTOMS
L, Namesine Ball scessssccnsesossssuensmncosnonccesssnssastsusassnvessasibassiapecastoaaseatcevraasieiesizags arstel tel tamu wensrouss
Ds BAIR IN Gis yespessscrcstcatecsreenseaoazsnreasoneczonteseatret ereetieewnnasnosnch SooanasaucoysteaaeaenN UN NE ioeneeeaatess
3. No. of checked in baggage(s).....seseeenee 4, No. of hand baggage(s)..secssecssees
5. Total value of dutiable goods being imported ........ceccesesssessssecessnsesesseesesasestecseesessecseeease
Signature OF He PASSEMO ets cssvssceiceacsecssnsescbueccvccsscoctoraepweagecelp meee ete oa eae ooh SLIDO RSET oabewennesn
DEPARTURE (EMBARKATION) CARD FOR INDIAN NATIONALS
Please write in CAPITALS only. One character in one box as shown below.
Do not write across the lines. Leave a box blank for space
ATEICT® LET [2] 3 [475
la. Name (as in passport) Leave one box blank afetr every part of the name/initial)
lb. Sex (put ‘/” in box) 2a. Place of birth (city /district)
Male [7] ‘Female [ [thtiit titer
2b. Date of birth (DD/MM/YY)

[PAGE 15]
38 The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992
3a. Passport Number 3b. Date of issue (DD/MM/YY)
3c. Place of issue (city and country)
4a. Date of boarding (DD/MM/YY) 4b. Flight Number
4c. Port of final destination
5. Occupation (put ‘/’ in appropriate box)
Doctor Business Employed Media Lawyer Government Sports Person —_ Other
6. Purpose of visit (put ‘/’ in appropriate box)
Tourism Business Transit Official Employment Education Conference Social Med. Treatment Other ,
7. Address in India & Tel contact No. IMMIGRATION STAMP (DEPARTURE)
LEC SE AT AOA |
| Pin Code [] [] 11 |
* Signature of passenger
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
ARRIVAL (DISEMBARKATION) CARD
FOR INDIAN NATIONALS
la. Name (as in passport) Leave one box blank afetr every part of the name/initial)
1b. Sex (put ‘/’ in box) 2. Date of birth (DD/MM/YY)
Male [7] Female [7] Rererit yr
3a. Passport Number 4. Date of issue (DD/MM/YY)
4a. Date of arrival (DD/MM/YY) 4b. Flight Number 4c. Port of boarding

[PAGE 16]
The Registration of Foreigners Rules, 1992 39
-s- SS T- - - — — — FOLD HERE— — — — — — — — — — —
| Signature of passenger |
IMMIGRATION STAMP (DEPARTURE) IMMIGRATION STAMP (ARRIVAL)
———_—— = = — =| = FOLD AEE SO ee Oe or
ON RETURN TO INDIA, HAND OVER THIS PART OF THE CARD TO THE
CUSTOM OFFICER WHILE LEAVING THE AIRPORT/CHECKPOST
CUSTOMS
Hes INERT NRTA EGG ch a0 ga cte che asen decane Ra iene nsnexeasoavonnvoncoypsatconsenst resccucesuctatevae eeasaeatemruuspeneseeerseeieee
Ds BUSTY INGOs ates sss; onsssutisi 555025008505 caaaecoueeerapernescancsonnepnnnensnennovsononnenaussiaisesnntanssstcnnercestvacesvssunvasizes
3. No. of checked in baggage(s)......sseeeee 4. No. of hand baggage(s)..cesssersseess
5. Total value of dutiable goods being imported.......scccsssssssessssessssesssssessstessuesssuessssecsssecsssesees
Signature of the passengel........scsesssscssessecssesseessessessesssessvessrsseessessveneesseese SE eee |
FORM E
(Rule 17)
(Passenger manifest)
Name of shipping company ......s.ccssssesssssssessesssessscsesssessssssesssssssssssuesaese lpucsuscsssscesecsessesesse
INAHENGE VESHEN ss vaseseszescasssinzasaiecaseeneoonssnsysnetanzenneenditonesnpnsnesosonsonsousvavcssctdosiees ousxustvastuaacavertads
Port and date of embarkation/disembarkation in India ...c.scc.csescsssssseesecsssssesssseessceose
Sl Name of passenger Nationality Port of embarkation Port of
No. (abroad) disembarkation ;
abroad)
1 2 3 4 5
FORM F
(Rule 14)
Hotel Register
1. Serial No.
2. Name of visitor in full (in block capitals, surname first).
3. Nationality.
4. Number, date and place of issue of passport. ;
5. Address in India. - ;
6. Date of arrival in India.
7. Whether employed in India—Yes or No.
8. Proposed duration of stay in India.
9. Arrived from.
10. Number, date and place of issue of certificate of Registration, if any.
11. Purpose of visit.
12. Date and time of departure from hotel.
13. Address to which proceeding.
14. Signature of visitor.