[PAGE 1]
C H A P T E R - I

Preliminary

1. Short title and commencement - (1) These rules may be called
the Central Industrial Security Force Rules, 2001.

(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication
in the Official Gazette.

2. Definitions - In these rules, unless the context otherwise
requires -

(a) "Act" means the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968
(50 of 1968);

(b) "Appendix" means an appendix to these rules;

(c) "Close arrest" means confinement of any enrolled member
of the Force within the Force or a detachment of the Force
or a post quarter guard, building or tent under charge of a
guard;

(d) "Magistrate"means any Magistrate as referred to in section 3
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973;

(e) "Open arrest" means confinement of any enrolled
member of the Force within the precinct of any barrack,
lines or camp for the time being occupied by any detachment
of the Force;

(f) "Schedule" means a Schedule appended to these rules;

(g) "Section" means a section of the Act;

(h) The expressions "Assault", "criminal Force"," reason to
believe", "wrongfully restrain" and "voluntarily causes hurt"
have the meaning assigned to them respectively in Indian
PenalCode;

(i) Words and expressions used in these rules and not defined,
but defined in the Act, shall have the meaning respectively
assigned to them in the Act.

[PAGE 2]
C H A P T E R - II

COMPOSITION OF THE FORCE

3. Constitution of the Force - (1) The Force shall consist of the
following three branches, namely :-

(i) Executive Branch;
(iii) Ministerial Branch

(ii) Fire Service Branch; and

(2) Each Branch shall consist of such supervisory officers
(other than the Director General) and enrolled members of
the Force as the Director General may from time to time specify.

4. Composition of the Force - The Supervisory Officers and
enrolled members of the Force shall be classified in accordance with
the ranks in the following categories, namely:-

(1) (a) Supervisory Officers

(i) Director General;

(ii) Inspector General;

(iii) Deputy Inspector General, Deputy Inspector
General(Fire) and Director, National Industrial Security
Academy ;

(iv) Commandant, Assistant Inspector General, Assistant
Inspector General (Fire), Commandant (Fire), Group
Commandant, Principal,Recruits Training Centre,
Principal, Fire Service Training Institute;
Assistant Director, National Industrial Security
Academy.

(v) Deputy Commandant and Deputy Commandant (Fire) and
Joint Assistant Director, National Industrial Security
Academy.

(vi) Assistant Commandant, Vice Principal,Recruits
Training Centre, Assistant Commandant (Junior
Administrative Officer) and Assistant Commandant
(Fire) and Deputy Assistant Director, National
Industrial Security Academy.

(b) Enrolled Members

(vii) Inspector (Executive, Stenographer,
Ministerial, Fire and Armourer)

[PAGE 3]
(viii) Sub-Inspector (Executive,Stenographer,
Ministerial, Fire and Armourer);

(ix) Assistant Sub-Inspector (Executive,
Ministerial, Fire and Armourer);

(x) Head Constable(Driver, Executive, Fire and Armourer);

(xi) Constables (Executive, Fire, Armourer); and

(xii) Followers (Cook, Kahar, Sweeper,Mochi,Barber,
Carpenter, Tailor, Dhobi, Charge Mechanic,Motor Pump
Attendant, Switch Board Attendant and Painter).

Each of the above categories of ranks other than the ranks
mentioned at item No.(xii) shall be the immediate superior in
rank to the rank mentioned below that category.

(2) Unless the context otherwise requires,
reference to Commandant, Deputy Commandant, Assistant
Commandant, Inspector, Sub-Inspector, Assistant Sub-
Inspector, Head Constable, Constable and Followers in
these rules shall be deemed respectively to include
references to all or any of the ranks of Supervisory
Officers or enrolled members of the Force as the case
may be specified in items (iv) to (xii) of sub-rule(1).

5. Conferment of local rank - Notwithstanding anything contained in
these rules, the Director General may, subject to confirmation
of the Central Government, grant to an officer of the Force a
higher rank than held by him, as a local rank, whenever considered
necessary by him in the interest of better functioning of the Force -

(i) a local rank shall be conferred by the Director General
up to and including the rank of Commandant only.

(ii) local rank to the officers of the level of Deputy
Inspector General and above shall be conferred after
prior approval of the Ministry of Home Affairs.

(iii) the power of conferring local ranks will not be further
delegated by the Director General to any of the officers
subordinate to him.

(iv) an officer of the Force who has been granted a local rank -

(a) shall exercise the command and be vested
with the powers of an officer holding that rank,

(b)shall cease to hold that rank, if the grant of such rank
is not confirmed within 21 days by the Central
Government, or when so ordered by the Director General or

[PAGE 4]
when he ceases to hold the appointment for which the
rank is granted,

(c)shall not be entitled to any extra pay and allowances for
holding such rank,

(d) shall not be entitled to claim any
seniority over other officers of the Force by virtue of
having held such rank.

6. Duties of Director General- (1) The Director General shall be
the Head of the Force and shall be responsible for maintaining it
in a state of high efficiency, training,discipline and morale and
he shall for that purpose take all such steps as he may consider
necessary, by way of tours, inspections, examination of records,
calling for reports, framing regulations, issuing instructions and
giving directive on all matters pertaining to the administration
of the Force. He shall in particular guide and direct the
supervisory officers and it shall be his duty to ensure that each
supervisory officer maintains the Force in his charge at a high
level of efficiency and discipline.

(2) The Director General shall keep himself in touch with the
Chairman, Managing Directors and General Managers of
the Public Sector Undertakings where the Force is deputed
and post himself from time to time with the problems and
needs of each such Undertakings in relation to the
Force. He shall maintain close liaison with the Police and
other authorities of the State so as to secure effective
co-ordination between the State Police and the Force in regard
to matters pertaining to the protection and Security of
Public Sector Undertakings. He shall keep the Central
Government duly informed of all matters of importance.

7. Duties of Sector Inspectors General in Central Industrial Security
Force - (1) To exercise powers of Head of Department in the
respective sectors for inclusion which may consist one or more zones
in financial and administrative matters as provided under the various
rules.

(2) To closely monitor the crime situations in the field units and
adopt proper crime control measures in the respective Sectors.

(3) To exercise operational control of the Force, deployed under his
charge including those in various Public Sector Undertakings
and to render timely directions to the respective Zonal/Plant
Deputy Inspectors General. This also includes deployment on
Internal Security duties/Election duties etc.

(4) To guide and direct all concerned to ensure effective security
arrangements in the Industrial Undertakings.

[PAGE 5]
(5) To establish and maintain liaison and co-ordination with the
Chief Secretaries, Director General of Police/Inspector General
of Police of the States and Heads/Chief Executives of the Public
Sector Establishments.

(6) To carry out the inspections of Units in his sector as per the
Circulars from Force Head-quarters

(7) To scrutinise the inspection reports conducted by the Zonal/Plant
Deputy Inspectors General relating to various Units and
monitoring of the compliance of short-falls pointed out
therein.

(8) To conduct special enquiries within the Sector or elsewhere
as and when so directed by Force Headquarters.

(9) To scrutinise and approve the tour programmes, inspection notes
and monthly diaries of Zonal/Plant Deputy Inspectors General.

(10) To exercise powers for grant of leave as per the
rules/instructions issued by Force Headquarters.

(11) To order postings/transfers of enrolled members of the Force
within the sector.

(12) To ensure speedy disposal of departmental enquiry cases and
close monitoring of Court cases.

(13) To ensure timely recovery of Central Industrial Security Force
dues.

(14) To ensure proper training of the Force personnel under his charge.

(15) To look after and to take effective steps for the welfare of
Force personnel under his charge to keep their morale high.
(16) To ensure timely action by Units on information/details
asked for by Force Headquarters.

8. Duties of Deputy Inspector General - (1) For proper supervision
of the Force, the Country shall be divided in zones. A Deputy
Inspector General shall be the incharge of each zone. He shall be
responsible for maintaining the Force in his charge in a state of
high efficiency, training, discipline and morale. For this purpose,
he shall inspect the Units and the Industrial Undertakings in Public
Sector in his Zone where the Force is deputed at least twice a
year and send his Inspection Reports to the Inspector General,
giving details of the state of the Force and its administration.

(2) The Deputy Inspector General shall be readily available to the
Commandants and shall aid,advice and control them. He shall keep
in touch with the Chairman, Managing Directors and General
Managers of the Undertakings in his Zone and shall also keep
liaison with the State authorities with a view to secure full

[PAGE 6]
co- operation between the State Police and the Force in ensuring
proper protection and security of the property of the Industrial
Undertakings in the Public Sector in his Zone. He shall keep
the Inspector General fully informed of all developments which
need his attention normally all communications between the
Commandant and Inspector General shall be channalized through the
Deputy Inspector General though in cases of great urgency the
Commandant may write to the Inspector General direct in which
case, he shall endorse a copy to the Deputy Inspector General.

9. Duties of Managing Director and General Manager - The Force deputed
to an Undertaking shall work under the general supervision, direction
and control of the Managing Director of that Undertaking. The
Commandant of the Force shall keep the managing director fully
informed of all developments including the state of the Force. The
Managing Director shall inspect the posts of the Force situated in
his Undertaking atleast once a year.

10. Duties of Commandant- (1) The Commandant shall be the head of the
Unit. He shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and
morale of the Unit and for the proper management of each branch
of the Force under him. He shall periodically inspect the Units of
the Force under his command. All orders to the Force under him shall
emanate from him and all communications from the Force under him shall
pass through him.

(2) The Commandant shall regularly inspect the detachments of the
Force posted outside the headquarters and ensure that they remain
in a high state of efficiency. He shall ensure thatn all
enrolled members of the Force under him attend parade and
refresher courses in turn according to a programme. When at
headquarters, he shall attend the parade every Tuesday and
Friday and hold the Orderly Room every Friday.

(3) The Commandant shall be responsible for the security of the
Undertaking in which the detachment of his Units are posted.
For that purpose he shall remain in close touch with the district
as well as Police authorities and the heads of the various
departments in the said Undertaking. He shall keep the Managing
Director and the General Manager of the said undertaking as
well as the Deputy Inspector General fully informed of all the
developments and send them regular fortnightly reports as
prescribed. Matters of urgent nature,however, shall be brought
to their notice by the quickest possible means. He shall pay his
personal attention to the working of the Intelligence wing and
ensure that intelligence is efficiently collected and conveyed
promptly to the Managing Director, General Manager and the
Deputy Inspector General.

11. Duties of Deputy Commandant - (1) The Deputy Commandant shall
assist the Commandant in the discharge of his duties; and where he
is placed as head of the Unit, he shall discharge all the duties

[PAGE 7]
of a Commandant and shall exercise only those financial powers that
are delegated to him under the relevant rules.

(2)The Deputy Commandant shall be responsible for the efficiency,
discipline and morale of the personnel under him and shall also
be responsible for the security of the undertaking or its part
entrusted to him.

12. Duties of Assistant Commandant - The Assistant Commandant shall
assist the Commandant and unless specifically directed to the contrary
in the regulations framed for the purpose he shall perform all
the functions of the Commandant when so required by the later. He
shall be responsible for the efficiency, discipline and morale of the
personnel under him and shall also be responsible for the security
of the Undertaking or its part entrusted to him.

[PAGE 8]
C H A P T E R - III

PROCEDURE OF ARREST, SEARCH, ETC

13. Arrest - (1) In making an arrest, under sub-section(1) of Section
11 of the Act, the member of the Force shall actually touch or confine
the body of the person to be arrested.

(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or
attempts to evade the arrest, the member of the Force may use
all means necessary to effect the arrest. In case of use of
force, it should be minimum, required in that particular situation.

(3) The person arrested shall not be subject to more restraint than
necessary to prevent his escape.

(4) The member of the Force making the arrest, may search such person,
and place in safe custody all articles including weapons, if
any, other than necessary wearing apparels, found upon him. An
inventory of all such articles shall be prepared in the presence
of at least two respectable witnesses and in the presence of
the arrested person and a copy of the inventory duly signed by
the witnesses and the person conducting the search, shall be
given to the person so arrested after obtaining due receipt.

(5 Such arrested person as well as the seized articles and its
inventory shall be handed over to a police officer or at the
nearest police station without avoidable delay alongwith a
brief note giving the time, date and reasons of arrest.

14. Search - Whenever a search of a person and of his belonging is
conducted under section 12 of the Act, an inventory shall be prepared
in the presence of the two respectable witnesses and a copy of the
inventory duly signed by the witnesses and the person who conducted the
search, shall be given to the person concerned after obtaining due
receipt. The property so found on such search, shall also be sent to
the police alongwith the person. If nothing is found on such search,
a nil inventory statement duly signed shall be sent to the police
alongwith the person.

15. Prescribed rank - The prescribed rank for the purposes of subsection (1) of section 12 of the Act shall be the Head Constable.

[PAGE 9]
C H A P T E R - IV

RECRUITMENT TO THE FORCE

16. Powers of appointment - Subject to the provisions of the Act and these
rules, appointments to the post of Inspector shall be made by the
Deputy Inspector General concerned and to the ranks of Sub-Inspector,
Assistant Sub-Inspector, Head Constable, Constable and Followers shall
be made by the Commandant.

17. Conditions of eligibility for appointment to the Force - No person
shall be eligible for appointment to the Force unless -

(a) (i) he is a citizen of India; or

(ii) he belongs to such categories of persons as may, from
time to time be declared by the Central Government as being
eligible for appointment to the Force;

(b) he bears a good moral character,

(c) he obtains a health certificate in the form prescribed in
Appendix "C" certified by a Medical Officer of Central
Industrial Security Force or any other Medical Officer or
Assistant Surgeon belonging to Grade-I of any Government
Hospital or Dispensary.

18. Disqualification - No person, - (a) who has entered into or
contracted a marriage with a person having a spouse living; or (b)
who, having a spouse living, has entered into or contracted a marriage
with another person, shall be eligible for appointment to the Force;

Provided that the Central Government may, if satisfied that such
marriage is permissible under the personal law applicable to such
person and the other party to the marriage and there are other grounds
for so doing, exempt any person from the operation of this rule.

[PAGE 10]
C H A P T E R - V

DIRECT RECRUITMENT

19. Name of the posts, their classification and scales of pay - The
name of posts of members of the Force, their number and classification
and the scale of pay attached thereto shall be as specified in
the Recruitment Rules as amended from time to time.

20. Method of recruitment, age limits and other qualifications - The
method of recruitment, age limits, qualifications and other matters
relating to each of the said post shall be as specified in the
recruitment rules as amended from time to time.

21. Agreement - Every enrolled member of the Force except those appointed
on transfer on deputation shall execute at the time of his initial
appointment an agreement in the form specified in Appendix "A".

22. Cadre - Each of the three branches mentioned in rule 3 shall form a
separate cadre for the purpose of seniority, promotion and confirmation.

[PAGE 11]
C H A P T E R - VI

DEPUTATION

23. (1)(a) During the period of deputation, the officer on deputation
shall be governed by the provisions of the Act and the rules
and regulations made thereunder. Provided that the provisions
of rules 58, 59 and 71 shall not apply to him.

(b) Without prejudice to the foregoing, every such officer shall
be subject to the rules of discipline applicable to the
corresponding rank to the Force.

(2) Save as aforesaid, the other terms and conditions of deputation
shall be such as may be agreed upon between the lending authority
and the Central Government.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the Central
Government or the Director General, as the case may be, may,
without assigning any reason terminate the period of deputation
of any officer at any time and such termination shall not be deemed
to be a punishment.

[PAGE 12]
C H A P T E R - VII

PROMOTION

24. Promotion - Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules specially
deserving Constable or Head Constable who have put in fifteen or
twenty years of service may be promoted to the rank of Head Constable
or Assistant Sub-Inspector as the case may be, on the basis of
their service records by the Commandant with the approval of the
Deputy Inspector General, but the total number of such promotion
shall not exceed 10% of the posts which may be filled by the method
of promotion.

25. Probation - (1) Every member of the Force except those appointed on
deputation/absorption, shall be on probation for the period
specified in relevant column of the Recruitment Rules:

Provided that in the absence of a specific order of
confirmation or a declaration of satisfactory completion of
probation, a member of the Force shall be deemed to be on probation:

Provided further that no member of the Force shall ordinarily
be kept on probation for more than twice the period prescribed in
respective recruitment rules.

(2) If during the period of probation the appointing authority
is of the opinion that a member of the Force is not fit for
permanent appointment, the appointing authority may discharge him
from the Force after issue of notice of one month or after giving
one month's pay in lieu of such notice, or revert him to the
rank from which he was promoted or repatriate to his
parent department as the case may be.

(3) On successful completion of probation by a member of the Force,
the appointing authority shall pass an order confirming the
member of the Force in the grade in which he joined the Force.

26. Termination - (1) Where a notice is given by the Deputy Inspector
General terminating the services of a probationer is terminated either
on the expiry of the period of such notice or forthwith by payment of
pay plus allowance or services are terminated by the appointing
authority for his failure to pass the final examination of the initial
training course, the Inspector General, if the said Deputy Inspector
General or the appointing authority as the case may be is subordinate
to him, may on his own motion or otherwise, reopen the case and
after making such enquiry he may (i) confirm the action taken by the
Deputy Inspector General or the appointing authority as the case may
be; ii) withdraw the notice (iii)reinstate the probationer in service
; or (iv) make such other order in the case as he may consider proper.

[PAGE 13]
Provided that except in special circumstances, which
should be recorded in writing, no case shall be reopened under
this sub-rule after the expiry of three months.

(a) From the date of notice, in a case where notice is given.

(b) From the date of termination of service in a case where no
notice is given.

(2) Where a probationer is reinstated in service under above rule, the
order of reinstatement shall specify; (i) the amount of proportion of
pay and allowances, if any, to be paid to the probationer for the
period of his absence between the date of termination of his services
and date of his reinstatement; and (ii) whether the said period shall
be treated as a period spent on duty for any specified purpose or
purposes.

(3) Where the Inspector General has terminated the service of a
probationer, acting as appointing authority, all the powers
prescribed in sub-rule (1) and (2) above shall be exercised by the
Director General and where the Director General has issued the order
of termination by the Central Government.

[PAGE 14]
C H A P T E R - VIII

SPECIAL PROVISIONS

27. Special provision for certain categories of persons - Nothing in
these rules shall effect reservations, relaxation of age limit and
other concessions required to be provided for the Scheduled Caste, the
Scheduled Tribes, Ex-servicemen and other special categories of
persons, in accordance with the order issued by the Central Government
from time to time in this regard.

28. Power to relax - Notwithstanding anything contained in the
foregoing rules, where, in the interest of the formation and the due
unctioning of the Force it is necessary so to do relaxation under these
rules (other than the requirement of being medically fit) may be made
at the time of direct recruitment by the Director General:-

(i) Constable - any of the eligibility criteria.

(ii) Followers - Age limit only.

C H A P T E R - IX

CONDITIONS OF SERVICE AND CONDUCT

29. Manuals - The Director General shall frame Training Manual,
Establishment Manual as well as other manuals for administration of
the Force with the approval of the Central Government.

30. Solemn affirmation of allegiance - On appointment, each recruit
or cadet shall be required to solemnly affirm his allegiance in
the form given in Appendix "B" and shall receive a certificate of
appointment as prescribed in section 6 of the Act.

[PAGE 15]
C H A P T E R - X

PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE

31. Rules governing discipline - (1) Supervisory officers shall be governed
by the rules applicable to the officers of the Central Government
of corresponding class in respect of disciplinary proceedings.

(2) The enrolled members of the Force shall in such matters be
governed by the rules in this Chapter.

32. Disciplinary Authority - (1) The disciplinary authority in respect of an
enrolled member of the Force for the purpose of imposing any particular
penalty or the passing of any disciplinary order shall be the authority
specified in this behalf in Schedule-I under whose administrative
control the enrolled member is serving and shall include any authority
mentioned in the said Schedule superior to such authority.

(2) Whenever an enrolled member of the Force is deployed for
operational duty outside the place of his permanent posting
then a supervisory officer under whose control such member has
been so deployed shall be competent to place him under
suspension. Such supervisory officer shall refer the matter to
his disciplinary authority as mentioned in sub-rule (1).

(3) A disciplinary authority competent under Schedule -I to impose
any of the penalties specified in clause (vi) to (x) of rule
34 may institute disciplinary proceedings against any enrolled
member of the Force for imposition of any of the penalties
specified in clauses (i) to (v) of rule 34 notwithstanding that
such disciplinary authority is not competent under Schedule -I
to impose any such penalties.

33. Suspension -(1) The appointing authority or any authority to which it is
subordinate or the disciplinary authority or any other authority
empowered in that behalf by the President by general or special order
may place an enrolled member of the Force under suspension -

(a) where a disciplinary proceeding against him is
contemplated or is pending; or

(b) where a case against him in respect of any Criminal offence is
under investigation, inquiry or trial; or

(c) where in the opinion of the authority aforesaid, he engaged
himself in activities prejudicial to the interest of the
security of the State:

Provided that where the order of suspension is made by an
authority lower than the appointing authority, such authority
shall forthwith report to the appointing authority the

[PAGE 16]
circumstances in which the order was made and obtain his
approval within 30 days from the date of the order.

(2) An enrolled member of the Force shall be deemed to have been
placed under suspension by an order of the appointing authority -

(a) with effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained
in custody, whether on a criminal charge or otherwise, for a
period exceeding forty eight hours;

(b) with effect from the date of his conviction in the event of a
conviction for an offence, he is sentenced to a term of
imprisonment exceeding forty eight hours and is not
forthwith dismissed or removed or compulsorily retired
consequent to such conviction:

Explanation - The period of forty eight hours referred to in
clause (b) of this sub-rule shall be computed from the
commencement of the imprisonment after the conviction and for
this purpose, intermittent periods of imprisonment, if
any, shall be taken into account.

(3) Where a penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement
from service imposed upon an enrolled member of the Force under
suspension is set aside in appeal or on review under these rules
and the case is remitted for further enquiry or action or with
any other directions, the orders of his suspension shall be
deemed to have continued in Force on and from the date of the
original order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement
and shall remain in Force until further orders.

(4) Where a penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement
from service imposed upon an enrolled member of the Force is set
aside or declared or rendered void in consequence of or by a
decision or a court of law and the disciplinary authority, on
consideration of the circumstances of the case, decides to hold
a further inquiry against him on the allegations on which
the penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement was
originally imposed, the enrolled member of the Force shall be
deemed to have been placed under suspension by the
appointing authority from the date of the original order of
dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement and shall continue
to remain under suspension until further orders.

(5) (a) An order of suspension made or deemed to have been made under
this rule shall continue to remain in Force until it is modified
or revoked by the authority competent to do so.

(b) where an enrolled member of the Force is suspended or
is deemed to have been suspended (whether in connection with
any disciplinary proceedings or otherwise) and any
other disciplinary proceeding is commenced against him during
the continuance of that suspension, the authority competent to

[PAGE 17]
place him under suspension, may for reasons to be recorded by him
in writing, direct that the enrolled member of the Force shall
continue to be under suspension until the termination of
all or any of such proceedings.

(c) An order of suspension made or deemed to have been made
under this rule may at any time be modified or revoked by the
authority which made or is deemed to have been made the order or
by any authority to which that authority is subordinate.

34. Nature of Penalties - The following penalties may, for good and
sufficient reasons and as hereinafter provided, be imposed on an
enrolled member of the Force, namely:-

Major Penalties -

i) dismissal from service which shall ordinarily be a disqualification
for future employment under the Government;

(ii) removal from service which shall not be a disqualification for
future employment under the Government;

(iii) compulsory retirement;

(iv) reduction to a lower time scale of pay, grade, post or service
which shall ordinarily be a bar to the promotion of the Government
servant to the time scale of pay, grade, post or service from
which he was reduced with or without further directions regarding
conditions of restoration to the grade or post or service from
which enrolled member of the Force was reduced and his seniority
and pay on such restoration to that grade, post or service;

(v) save as provided for in clause (viii) below - reduction to a lower
stage in the time scale of pay for a specified period with
further directions as to whether or not the enrolled member
will earn increments of pay during the period of such
reduction and whether on the expiry of such period, the
reduction will have the effect of postponing the future
increments of his pay.

Minor penalties -

(vi) Censure;

(vii) withholding of his promotion;

(viii) Reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a period
of not exceeding three years, without cumulative effect and
not adversely affecting his pension;

(ix) withholding of increment of pay;

(x) fine to any amount not exceeding of 7 days pay.

[PAGE 18]
Explanation - The following shall not amount to a penalty within the
meaning of this rule, namely:-

(a) withholding of increment of an enrolled member for
failure to pass a departmental examination in accordance
with the rules or orders or the terms of his appointment;

(b) stoppage of increment of an enrolled member at the efficiency
bar in a time scale of pay on the ground of his unfitness to
cross the bar;

(c) non-promotion of an enrolled member whether in a substantive or
officiating capacity, after consideration of his case, to a rank
or post for promotion to which he is eligible;

(d) reversion of an enrolled member officiating in a higher rank or
post to a lower rank or post, on the ground that he is considered
after trial, to be unsuitable for such higher rank or post or
on any administrative grounds unconnected with his conduct;

(e) reversion of an enrolled member appointed on probation to any
other rank or post during or at the end of the period of
probation in accordance with the terms of his appointment or
the rules and orders governing such probation;

(f) replacement of the services of an enrolled member whose services
had been borrowed from any department of the Central
Government or State Government or any authority under the
Central Government or the State Government at the
disposal of the Central Government or the State Government or
the authority from which the services of such enrolled
member had been borrowed;

(g) compulsory retirement of an enrolled member in accordance with
the provisions relating to his superannuation or retirement:

(h) Termination of service - (i) of an enrolled member appointed
on probation during or at the end of the period of his
probation, in accordance with the terms of his appointment or
the rules and orders governing such probation; or

(ii) of a temporary enrolled member in accordance with the
provisions of rule 25; or

(iii) of an enrolled member, employed under an agreement, in
accordance with the terms of such agreement:

(I) treatment of absence from duty as "dies-non" ordered by a
competent authority under rule 55:

[PAGE 19]
35. Petty punishments - Head Constable, Constable and Follower may also
be awarded, as punishment, extra drill, guard, fatigue or other duty
for a term not exceeding fourteen days.

Explanation - Petty punishments shall ordinarily be awarded in Orderly
room as provided in rule 38 of this Chapter.

36. Procedure for imposing major penalties - (1) Without prejudice to the
provisions of the Public Servants (Inquiry) Act, 1850 (37 of 1850),
no order imposing on an enrolled member of the Force any of the
penalties as specified in clauses (i) to (v) of rule 34 shall be made
except after an inquiry held, as far as may be, in the manner
hereinafter provided.

(2) Whenever the disciplinary authority is of the opinion that there are
grounds for inquiring into the truth of any imputation of
misconduct or misbehavior against an enrolled member of the
Force, it may itself inquire into, or appoint an authority to
inquire into the truth thereof.

Explanation - Where the disciplinary authority itself holds the
inquiry, any reference in sub- rule (7) to (18) of this rule shall
be construed as a reference to the disciplinary authority.

(3) Where it is proposed to hold an inquiry against an enrolled
member of the Force under this rule, the disciplinary authority
shall draw up or cause to be drawn up -

(i) the substance of the imputation of misconduct or misbehavior
into definite and distinct articles of charge;

(ii) a statement of the imputation of misconduct or misbehavior in
support of each article of charge, which shall contain;

(a) a statement of all relevant facts including any admission or
confession made by the enrolled member of the Force;

(b) a list of documents by which, and a list of witnesses by
whom, the articles of charge are proposed to be sustained.

(4) The disciplinary authority shall deliver or cause to be delivered
to the enrolled member of the Force a copy of the articles of
charge, the statement of imputations of misconduct or
misbehaviour and a list of documents and witnesses by
which each article of charge is proposed to be sustained and
shall require the enrolled member of the Force to submit,
within such time as may be specified, a written statement
of his defence and to state whether he desires to be heard in
person.

(5)(a) On receipt of the written statement of defence, the disciplinary
authority may itself inquire into such of the articles of charge as
are not admitted, or if it considers it necessary to do so, appoint

[PAGE 20]
under sub-rule (2), an inquiring authority not below the rank
of Inspector for the purpose, and where all the articles of the
charge have been admitted by the enrolled member of the Force
in his written statement of defence, the disciplinary authority
shall record its findings on each charge after taking such
evidence as it may think fit and shall pass an order in the
manner laid down in sub-rule (20) to (22).

(b) If no written statement of defence is submitted by the
enrolled member of the Force, the disciplinary authority may
itself inquire into the articles of charge, or may, if it
considers it necessary to do so, appoint, under sub-rule (2) an
inquiring authority for the purpose.

(6)The disciplinary authority shall, where it is not the inquiring
authority, forward to the inquiring authority - (i) a copy of the
articles of charge and the statement of the imputations of
misconduct or misbehaviour;

(ii) a copy of the written statement of defence, if any, submitted
by the enrolled member of the Force;

(iii) a copy of the statement of witnesses, if any, referred to in
sub-rule (3);

(iv) evidence proving the delivery of the documents referred
to in sub-rule(3) to the enrolled member of the Force.

(7) The enrolled member of the Force shall appear in person before
the inquiring authority on such day and at such time and place,
within ten working days from the date of receipt by him of the
article of charge and the statement of imputation of misconduct
or misbehaviour as the inquiring authority may, by notice in
writing, specify in this behalf or within such further time,
not exceeding ten days as the inquiring authority may allow.

(8)(a) The enrolled member of the Force so charged may be
permitted by the inquiring authority to present his case with
the assistance of any other Member of the Force posted at the
place of inquiry. He will give three choices for his defence
assistance and the controlling officer will depute any one
of the three indicated by him;
(b) The enrolled member of the Force can not have more than three
cases in hand in which he is rendering defence assistance.
However, the controlling authority of such persons who is
sought to be engaged may refuse permission for his working as
defence assistant if the public interest so demands.

(9) If the enrolled member of the Force who has not admitted any of the
article of charge in his written statement of defence or has not
submitted any written statement of defence, appears before the
inquiring authority, such authority shall ask him whether he is
guilty or has any defence to make and if he pleads guilty to

[PAGE 21]
any of the articles of charge, the enquiring authority shall
record the plea, sign the record and obtain the signature of the
enrolled member of the Force thereon.

(10) The inquiring authority shall return a finding of guilt in
respect of those articles of charge to which the enrolled member of
the Force pleads guilty.

(11) The inquiring authority shall, on receipt of the notice for the
discovery or production of documents forward the same or copies
thereof to the authority in whose custody or possession the
documents are kept, with a requisition for the production of the
documents by such date as may be specified in such requisition.

(12) On receipt of the requisition referred to in sub-rule (11), every
authority having the custody or possession of the
requisitioned documents shall produce the same before the
inquiring authority;

Provided that if the authority having the custody or
possession of the requisitioned documents is satisfied for
reasons to be recorded by it in writing that the production of
all or any of such documents would be against the public interest
or security of the state, it shall inform the inquiring
authority accordingly and the inquiring authority shall, on
being so informed, communicate the information to the
enrolled member of the Force and withdraw the requisition made
by it for the production or discovery of documents.

(13) The inquiring authority shall direct the enrolled member of the
Force, if he so wishes for the purpose of preparing his defence to
inspect and take extracts from such official records as specified in
list referred to in sub-rule (3) within 5 days from the date of such
order. The disciplinary authority may refuse to grant access of any
such documents, if that authority is of the opinion for the reasons
to be recorded in writing, that such records are not relevant for
the purpose or these are against the public interest.

(14) The inquiring authority shall, if the enrolled member of the
Force fails to appear within the specified time or refuses or
omits to plead, proceed to record the evidence by which the
articles of charge are to be sustained.
(15) On the date fixed for the inquiry, the inquiring authority
shall examine the oral and documentary evidence by which the
articles of charge are proposed to be proved. The enrolled member
of the Force shall be entitled to cross- examine the witnesses
examined in support of the charge. The inquiring authority may also
put such questions to the witnesses as it thinks fit.

(16) The enrolled member of the Force may give the name of his defence
witnesses who, shall be examined. If the inquiring authority
declines to examine any defence witnesses on the ground that his

[PAGE 22]
evidence is not relevant or material, it shall record its
reasons for the same in writing.

(17) The enquiring authority may after the enrolled member close his
case, and shall generally question him on the circumstances
appearing against him in the evidence for the purpose of enabling
him to explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence
against him. The enrolled member may also be permitted to file the
written statement of his defence, if he so desires within 7 days.

(18) If the enrolled member to whom a copy of the articles of the
charge has been delivered, does not submit written statement on
or before the date specified for the purpose or does not appear
in person before the inquiring authority or otherwise fails or
refuses to comply with provisions of the rule, the inquiring
authority may hold the enquiry ex-parte.

(19) (i) After the conclusion of the inquiry, a report shall be prepared
and it shall contain -

(a) the article of charge and the statement of the imputations of
misconduct or misbehaviour;

(b) the defence of the enrolled member in respect of each article of
charge;

(c)an assessment of the evidence in respect of ach article of charge;

(d) the findings on each article of charge and reasons thereof-

Explanation - If, in the opinion of the inquiring authority the
proceedings of the inquiry establish any article of charge
different from the original article of the charge, it may record
its findings on such article of charge;

Provided that the findings on such article of charge shall
not be recorded unless the enrolled member has either admitted the
fact on which such article of charge is based or has had a
reasonable opportunity of defending himself against such article
of charge.

(ii) The inquiring authority, where it is not itself the
disciplinary authority shall forward to the disciplinary
authority the records of enquiry which shall include -

(a)the report prepared by it under clause (i);

(b)the written statement of defence, if any, submitted by the
enrolled member;

(c) the oral and documentary evidence produced in the course of
inquiry;

[PAGE 23]
(d) written brief, if any, filed by the enrolled member
during the course of the inquiry; and

(e) the orders, if any, made by the disciplinary
authority and the inquiry authority in regard to the enquiry.

(20) (i)where a disciplinary authority competent to impose any of the
minor penalties and not competent to impose any of the major
penalties specified in rule 34 has itself inquired into or cause
to be inquired into the articles of any charge and that authority
having regard to his own finding or having regard to his decision
on any of the findings of any inquiring authority appointed by it,
is of the opinion that the major penalty specified in rule 34 should
be imposed upon the enrolled member, that authority shall forward
the records of the inquiry to such disciplinary authority as is
competent to impose any of the major penalties.

(ii) The disciplinary authority to which the records are so forwarded
may act on the evidence on the record or may remit the case to the
disciplinary authority from whom the records were forwarded or the
inquiring authority, as the case may be, for further inquiry and
report on ny point.

(21) (i) The disciplinary authority, if it is not itself the inquiring
authority, may, consider the records of inquiry and record its
findings on each charge. The disciplinary authority may, for reasons
to be recorded by it in writing remit the case to the inquiring
authority for further inquiry and report and the inquiring
authority shall thereupon proceed to hold the further inquiry
according to the provisions of this rule as far as may be.

(ii)The disciplinary authority shall, if it disagrees with the
findings of the inquiring authority on any article of charge,
record its reasons for such disagreement and record its own
findings on such charge if the evidence on record is sufficient for
the purpose.

(22) (i) If the disciplinary authority having regard to its findings
on all or any of the articles of charge is of the opinion that
any of the minor penalties specified in rule 34 should be
imposed on the enrolled member, it shall notwithstanding
anything contained in rule 37 make an order imposing such penalty;

(ii) If the disciplinary authority having regard to its
findings on all or any of the articles of charge and on the
basis of evidence adduced during the course of inquiry, is of the
opinion that any of the major penalties specified in rule 34
should be imposed on the enrolled member, it shall make an
order imposing such penalties and it shall not be necessary to
give the enrolled member any opportunity of making representation
on the penalty proposed to be imposed.

[PAGE 24]
37. Procedure for imposing minor penalties - (1) No order imposing any of
minor penalties specified in rule 34 shall be made except after -

(a) informing the enrolled member in writing of the imputations of
misconduct or misbehaviour on which it is proposed to be taken and
giving him a reasonable opportunity of making such
representation as he wishes to make against the proposal;

(b) holding an inquiry, if the disciplinary authority so desires,
in the manner laid down in sub-rules (3) to (22) of rule 36;

(c) taking the representation, if any submitted by the enrolled
member under clause (a) and the record of inquiry, if any, held
under clause (b) into consideration; and

(d)recording the findings on each imputationof misconduct or
misbehaviour;

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (b) of sub-rule (1), if
in a case it is proposed after considering the representation, if
any, made by the Government servant under clause (a) of that subrule to withhold increments of pay and such withholding of increments
is likely to affect adversely the amount of pension payable to the
Government Servant or to withhold increments of pay for a period
exceeding 3 years or to withhold increments of pay with cumulative
effect for any period an inquiry shall be held in the manner laid down
in sub-rule (3) to (22) of Rule 36 before making any order imposing
on the enrolled member of the Force any such penalty.

(3) The records of the proceedings in such cases shall include -
(i) a copy of the intimation to the enrolled member so charged
of the proposal to take action against him;

ii) a copy of the statement of imputation of misconduct or
misbehaviour delivered to him;

(iii) his representation, if any;

(iv) the evidence produced during the enquiry, if any;

(v) the findings on each imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour; and

(vi)the orders on the case together with the reasons therefor.

38. Procedure for imposing petty punishment - Petty breaches of
discipline and trifling cases of misconduct by the enrolled members
of the Force not above the rank of the Head Constable shall be
inquired into and disposed of in the Orderly room. The punishment
enumerated in rule 35 may be awarded, making a record of the
summary proceedings in the Orderly Room register which shall be
maintained for keeping record of such punishments. There shall be no
appeal against the punishment awarded in the Orderly Room.

[PAGE 25]
39. Special procedure in certain cases - Not with standing anything
contained in rules 36 to 38 -

(i) where any penalty is imposed on an enrolled member of the Force on
the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a
criminal charge; or

(ii) where the disciplinary authority is satisfied for reasons to
be recorded by it in writing that it is not reasonably
practicable to hold an inquiry in the manner provided in these
rules, or

(iii) where the President is satisfied that in the interest of the
security of the state, it is not expedient to hold any inquiry in
the manner provided in these rules, the disciplinary
authority may consider the circumstances of the case and make
such orders thereon as it deems fit;

Provided that the enrolled member of the Force may be
given an opportunity of making representation against the penalty
proposed to be imposed before any order is made in case under
clause (i).

40. Provisions regarding enrolled members of the Force borrowed from State
Governments etc. -(1) where an order of suspension is made or a
disciplinary proceeding is conducted against an enrolled member of the
Force whose services have been borrowed from another department of the
Central Government or from a State Government or an authority
subordinate thereto, the authority lending his services (hereinafter in
these rules referred to as the 'lending authority') shall forthwith
be informed of the circumstances leading to the order of
suspension the enrolled member of the Force or the commencement of
the disciplinary proceedings, as the case may be.

(2) In the light of the findings in the disciplinary proceedings
conducted against such an enrolled member of the Force if
the disciplinary authority is of the opinion that any of the penalties
specified in clause (vi) to (x) of rule 34 should be imposed on him,
it may, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (22) (i) of rule 36
and after consultation with the lending authority, pass such orders
on the case as it may deem necessary -

(i) provided that in the event of difference of opinion between the
borrowing authority and the lending authority, the services of
such enrolled member of the Force shall be replaced at the
disposal of the lending authority;

(ii) if the disciplinary authority is of the opinion that any of
the penalties specified in clauses (i) to (v) of rule 34 should
be imposed on the enrolled member of the Force, it shall replace
the services of such enrolled member of the Force at the
disposal of the lending authority and transmit to it the

[PAGE 26]
proceedings of the enquiry for such action as it may deem
necessary.

41. Provisions regarding enrolled member of the Force lent to state
Government etc. -(1) where the services of an enrolled member of
the Force are lent to another department of the Central
Government or to a State Government or other authority hereinafter in this rule referred to as "borrowing authority" the borrowing
authority hall have the powers of the appointing authority for the
purpose of placing such enrolled member of the Force under
suspension and of the disciplinary authority for the purpose
of conducting a disciplinary proceeding against him;

Provided that the borrowing authority shall forthwith inform the
authority which lent the services of such enrolled member of the
Force hereinafter in this rule referred to as 'the lending
authority' of the circumstances leading to the order of
suspension of such enrolled member of the Force or the commencement
of the disciplinary proceeding, as the case may be:

(2) In the light of findings in the disciplinary
proceedings conducted against the enrolled member of the Force;

(i) If the borrowing authority is of the opinion that any of the
panalties specified in clauses (vi) to (x)of Rule 34 should be
imposed on such a member, it may, after consultation with the
lending authority, make such orders on the case as it may deem
necessary;

Provided that in the event of difference of opinion between
the borrowing authority and the lending authority, the services
of such enrolled member of the Force shall be replaced at
the disposal of the lending authority;

(ii) If the borrowing authority is of the opinion that any
of the panalties specified in clauses (i) to (v) of rule 34
should be imposed on the enrolled member, it shall replace
his services at the disposal of lending authority and transmit
the proceedings of the enquiry and thereupon the lending
authority may, if its is a disciplinary authority, pass such
orders thereon as it may deem necessary, or if he is not a
disciplinary authority, submit the case to the appropriate
disciplinary authority which shall pass orders on the case as
it may deem necessary;

Provided that before passing any such order the
disciplinary authority shall comply with the provisions of subrule (22) of rule 36.

Explanation - The disciplinary authority may make an order
under this clause on the record of the inquiry transmitted to
it by the borrowing authority or after holding such further

[PAGE 27]
inquiry as it may deem necessary, as far as may be in
accordance with rule 36.

42. Reduction in rank etc. - No enrolled member of the Force shall be
reduced to a rank lower than that to which he was first appointed to
the service nor shall be reduced permanently in the sense that he may
never be eligible for re-promotion however meritorious his subsequent
service may be. When reduction to a lower rank class, grade or a lower
time scale or a lower stage in the time scale is ordered, the order
shall also specify the position in the lower rank on such reduction as
well as the period for which the reduction shall hold good.

43. Withholding of increment - In case of withholding of increment as a
punishment, the order shall state the period for which the increment is
to be withheld and whether it shall have the effect of postponing
further increments.

C H A P T E R - XI

APPEALS, REVISIONS AND PETITIONS

44. Appeal against order of suspension - An enrolled member of the Force
may appeal against the order of suspension to the authority, to
which the authority which made or is deemed to have made the order
is immediately subordinate.

45. Orders against which no appeal lies - Notwithstanding
anything contained in this chapter, no appeal shall lie against -

(i) any order of interlocutory nature or of the nature of step-inaid or the final disposal of disciplinary proceedings other than
an order of suspension; and

(ii) any order passed by an inquiring authority in the course of
inquiry under rule 36.

46. Appeal against order imposing penalties -(1)An enrolled member may
prefer an appeal against all or any of the following orders,
namely :-
(i) an order of suspension made or deemed to have been made
under rule 33;

(ii) an order imposing any of the penalties specified in
rule 34, made by the disciplinary authority or by any
appellate or revising authority.

(2) Such appeal shall be made to the authority immediately
superior to the authority who has imposed the penalty.

[PAGE 28]
NOTE : (i) Appeal against the order of Deputy Inspector General
shall lie to the Sector Inspector General and against the
order of the Sector Inspector General to the Director General.

(ii) Appeal against the order of the Deputy Inspector General at
Force Headquarters including Deputy Inspector General (Training
and Fire) shall lie to Inspector General (Headquarters) and
against the order of Inspector General (Headquarters) to the
Director General.

(iii) Appeal against the order of the Director General shall
lie to the Central Government.

(iv) Where the person who made the order appealed against
becomes, by virtue of his subsequent appointment or otherwise
the appellate authority in respect of such order, an appeal
against such order shall lie to the authority to whom such
person is immediately subordinate.

(3) There shall be no second appeal. But when the appellate
authority imposes a penalty higher than the one appealed
against, an appeal shall lie to the authority next
superior to the appellate authority.

47. Period of limitation for appeals - No appeal under these rules
shall be entertained unless it is submitted within a period of 30 days
from the date on which the appellant receive a copy of the order
appealed against.

Provided that the appellate authority may entertain the appeal
after the expiry of the said period, if it is satisfied that the
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal in time.

48. Form and contents of appeal- (1) Every enrolled member preferring
an appeal shall do so separately in his own name.

(2) The appeal shall be addressed to the authority to whom the
appeal lie, shall contain all material statements and arguments on
which the appellant relies, shall not contain any
disrespectful or improper language, and shall be complete in itself.

49. Submission of Appeals- (1) The appellant shall submit such appeal
to the authority which made the order appealed against :

Provided that if the appellant at the time of submitting such appeal
is not serving under that authority, shall submit the appeal to the
authority under whom he is serving and that authority shall forward it
forthwith to the appropriate authority. If the appellant is not in
service, he shall submit his appeal direct to the appellate authority,
a copy of the appeal will also be forwarded by the appellant to the
authority which made the order appealed against.

[PAGE 29]
50. Withholding of appeals - (1) The authority which made the order appealed
against, may withhold the appeal if - (i) it is an appeal against an
order for which no appeal lies under rule 45; or

(ii) it is not in conformity with the provisions of rule 48; or

(iii)it is not submitted within the period specified in rule 47
and no sufficient cause is shown for the delay ; or

(iv) it is repetition of any appeal already decided and no new
facts of circumstances are adduced;

Provided that an appeal withheld on the ground only that it
was not in conformity with provisions of rule 48, shall be returned
to the appellant and if re-submitted within 30 days thereof,
after compliance with the said provisions, shall not be withheld.

(2) Where an appeal is withheld on any grounds under sub-rule(1) of
this rule, the appellant shall be informed of the facts and
the reasons therefore.

51. Transmission of appeals - The authority which made the order
appealed against, shall on receipt of such appeal, forward the same
together with the relevant records, to the appellate authority without
any avoidable delay and without waiting for any directions from the
appellate authority unless the appeal is withheld under rule 50.

52. Consideration of appeals - (1) In the case of an appeal against an
order of suspension, the appellate authority shall consider whether
in the light of the provisions of rule 31 and having regard to the
circumstances of the case, the order of suspension is justified or
not and confirm or revoke the order accordingly.

(2) In the case of an appeal against the order imposing any of the
penalties specified in rule 34, or enhancing any penalty imposed
under the said rules, the appellate authority shall consider -

(a) Whether the procedure laid down in these rules has been
complied with and if not, whether such non-compliance has resulted in
the violation of any provisions of the Constitution of India or in the
failure of justice;

(b) Whether the findings of the disciplinary authority are
warranted on the basis of the evidence on the record ; and

(c) whether the penalty or the enhanced penalty imposed is excessive,
or adequate, or inadequate and pass orders;

(i)Confirming, enhancing, reducing or setting aside the penalty; or

[PAGE 30]
(ii)remitting the case to the authority which imposed or enhanced
the penalty, or to any other authority with such direction as it
may deem fit in the circumstances of the case :

Provided that -

(i) If such enhanced penalty which the appellate authority
proposes to impose is one of the panalties specified in
clauses (i) to (v) of rule 34 and an inquiry under rule 36 has
not already been held in the case, the appellate authority
shall, subject to the provisions of rule 39, itself hold such
an inquiry or direct that such inquiry be held in accordance
with rule 36 and thereafter on a consideration of the proceedings
of such inquiry make such orders as it may deem fit; and

(ii)If the enhanced panalty which the appellate authority proposes
to impose is one of the panalties specified in clause (i) to
(v) of rule 34 and an inquiry under rule 36 has already been
held in the case, the appellate authority shall make such orders
as it may deem fit.

53. Implementation of orders in appeal - The authority which made
the order appealed against shall give effect to the orders passed by
the appellate authority.

54. Revision - Any authority superior to the authority making the order
may either on his own motion or otherwise call for the records of any
inquiry and revise any order made under these rules, and may -

(a) confirm, modify or set aside the order; or

(b) confirm, reduce, enhance or set aside the penalty imposed by
the order, or impose any penalty where no penalty has been
imposed; or

(c) remit the case to the authority which made the order or to any
other authority directing such authority to make such further
enquiry as it may consider proper in the circumstances of the
case; or

(d) pass such orders as it may deem fit, within six months of
the date of communication of the order propose to be revised;
Provided that no order imposing or enhancing any penalty shall
be made by any revisioning authority unless the Government
servant concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of making
a representation against the penalty proposed and where it is
proposed to impose any of the penalties specified in clauses
(i) to (v) of rule 34 or to enchance the penalty imposed by the
order sought to be revised to any of the penalties
specified in those clauses, and if any, inquiry under rule-36 of
Central Industrial Security Force Rules, 1969 has not already been
held in the case no such penalty shall be imposed except after an
enquiry in the manner laid down in the aforesaid rules.

[PAGE 31]
2. The provisions of rule 52 relating to appeals shall apply
so far as may be to such orders in revision.

3. Orders and instructions issued by the Central Government on
this subject from time to time shall be applicable Mutatis
mutandis as applicable under Central Civil Services
(Classification Control and Appeal) Rules 1965.

55. Dies-non - Notwithstanding anything contained in hese rules a
disciplinary authority while passing final order to impose a
penalty upon an enrolled member of the Force or an appellate
authority or a revising authority may, on reinstatement of an
enrolled member of the Force in service after setting aside a
penalty of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement without
exonerating such enrolled member of the Force of the charges which
resulted in any of these penalties, after giving an opportunity to
the enrolled member of the Force concerned to show cause against
such action and for reasons to be recorded in writing, order
that the intervening period between the date of dismissal,
removal or compulsory retirement as the case may be and the date of
reinstatement be treated as dies-non for purposes of service.

56. Petitions - (1) Any enrolled member of the Force may submit a petition
in respect of any matter connected with his official position in which
his personal interests are involved other than a matter covered
by the rule relating to appeals and revision.

(2) Each such enrolled member of the Force shall submit a
petition solely relating to his individual case.

(3) Joint petitions of any kind whatsoever shall not be taken
notice of and submission of such petitions shall be deemed to
be an act of indiscipline.

(4) Such petition shall be in proper form and not couched in improper
language and be submitted to the immediate superior even if the
petitioner be on leave at the time. A petition submitted in
contravention of this rule shall be summarily rejected.

(5) Such immediate superior shall submit it through his immediate
superior to the authority competent to dispose it of. An officer
superior to him may withhold any such petition if it is couched
in intemperate language or is otherwise improperly written, in
which case he shall inform he petitioner in writing that his
petition has been withheld.

(6) In any subsequent petition to the competent authority, the
petitioner shall also attach to his petition a copy of the order
on his previous petition as communicated to him by his immediate
superior officer.

[PAGE 32]
57. Other methods forbidden - The supervisory officers and enrolled
members of the Force are forbidden from resorting to any method other
than that prescribed in these rules for pressing their claims or for
obtaining redress of alleged grievances or reversal, any such
attempt on their part shall be deemed to be an act of indiscipline.

C H A P T E R - XII

MISCELLANEOUS

58. Resignation - (1) The appointing authority may during the period of
probation or thereafter permit any member of the Force to resign from
his post with effect from such date as may be specified in the
order accepting his resignation:

Provided that before acceptance of resignation of any such
member of the force up to the period of ten years from the date
of appointment in the Force, for reasons other than accepting a job
elsewhere for which cadre clearance has been given, shall be
required to refund the cost of training imparted to him in the Force
or a sum equal to three months' pay and allowances, whichever is more.

(2) The resignation of a member of the Force who is under trial
or whose conduct is under inquiry may be refused.

59. Discharge Certificate - Whenever a member of the Force ceases to be
such member for any reason whatsoever, a discharge certificate in the
Form specified in Appendix "D" annexed to these rules shall be given to
him.

60. Surrender of certificate of appointment - Every enrolled member
ceasing to be a member of the Force shall surrender to his immediate
superior his certificate of appointment which shall thereupon be
submitted to the Commandant.

61. Free Accommodation - (1) Normally, the undertaking where the
Force has been deputed shall provide accommodation in the township
itself to all Supervisory Officers and at the rate of 45 percent
married and 55 percent unmarried or as amended by the Central
Government from time to time, to the enrolled members of the Force.

(2) The accommodation to the enrolled member of the Force shall be
rent-free but where such facilities are not available, they
shall get house rent allowance in lieu thereof as
applicable to other Central Government Employees.
(3) The members of the Force shall also get compensation in lieu
of married accommodation in terms of orders issued by the
Government from time to time in this respect. The
compensation shall be payable to that percentage of membrs of
the Force who are entitled to get married accommodation
minus those members of the Force who are allotted
accommodation by the Undertaking.

[PAGE 33]
(4) Supervisory Officer of the Force who is provided accommodation
by the public sector undertakings or allotted accommodation
by Directorate of Estate will pay licence fee to the public
sector undertakings at the rates as applicable to their
own employees or the licence fee as fixed by the Central
Government for general pool accommodation from time to time with
reference to plinth area of accommodation as the case may be.

62. Medical facilities - Members of the Force shall be entitled to the
facilities of the Central Government Health Scheme and in places
where these facilities are not available, they shall be governed by the
Central Civil Services (Medical Attendant) Rules, 1944;

Provided that when they are deployed in a Public Sector
Undertaking;

(i) in a case where such public sector undertaking provides
medical facilities to its employees, such members of the Force
shall be entitled to avail such facilities free of charge; and

(ii) if such facilities are not available, the authorised medical
attendant for such members of the Force will be as provided in
Central Civil Services (Medical Attendant) Rules, 1944.

63. Leave - The Supervisory Officers and members of the Force shall be
governed by the Leave Rules as are applicable to employees of the
Central Government, excepting that they shall be entitled to fifteen
days Casual Leave in a calender year in respect of field formation
where no specific working hours in a day or working weeks are
prescribed and entitlement of Casual leave in static formation like
Force Head Quarters, Sector Head Quarters etc of Central Industrial
Security Force will be 8 days in a calander year as per Ministry of
Home Affair's Office Memorandum No.27012/6/98/PF.I/419 dated
7.7.2000. The Regularisation of leave will be subject to orders
issued by Central Government from time to time.

64. Recall from Leave - The Supervisory officers and enrolled member of
the Force on leave may be recalled at any time by the authority
empowered to sanction their leave. They may be directed to report for
duty either at Headquarters or to proceed direct to the place
at which their services are required.

In either case, travelling allowance as on tour (by shortest route)
for the return journey may be allowed to them at the discretion of
the authority recalling them from leave.

65. Free Leave Pass and Leave Travel Concession- (1) Free Leave Pass and
leave travel concession shall be admissible to the members of the Force
of and below the rank of Head Constable as follows,namely -

(a) when living away from their families one free leave pass every
year from places of duty to the railway stations nearest to their

[PAGE 34]
towns and return, subject to the leave travel concession for their
families in a block period of two years.

(b) In case they are living with their families and propose to avail
themselves of leave travel concession for their families also, they
shall be entitled to free leave pass to home towns and return for
self only once in two years and leave travel concession (once in a
block period of two years) to the family members under the normal
leave travel concession Rules applicable to other Central Government
Employees.

(c) Free leave pass when proceeding on medical leave of duration of
not less than one month, provided it is certified that the illness
or injury which necessitated medical leave was not brought about by
any fault or negligence on the part of the member of the Force.

(d) Leave Travel Concession once in four years for self and family
members to travel to any place in India as admissible to other
Central Government Employees;

Provided that the leave travel concession admissible under
clause (d) shall be in lieu of the free leave pass admissible under
clause (a) and the leave travel concession and free leave pass
admissible under clause (b).

(2) Supervisory officers and members of the Force of and above the
rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector, shall be eligible to the same
leave travel concession to which the other Central
Government Employees are eligible persuant to the orders of the
Central Government in this behalf.

66. Power to grant monetary rewards - Monetary rewards may be
granted to the enrolled members of the Force, non-gazetted Government
Servants, employees and workers of the industrial undertakings
and members of the public in accordance with rule 67, 68 and 69.

67. Eligibility for monetary rewards -(1) Monetary rewards may be
granted only to the enrolled members of the Force for -

(a) doing outstanding work, requiring special courage, skill or
initiative such as -

(i) the arrest of a criminal; or

(ii) Securing of information leading to the detection of a
crime or matters connected there with; or

(iii) making exceptionally good enquiries; or

(iv) an encounter with a criminal, in connection with the protection,
safeguard and security of an industrial undertaking;

[PAGE 35]
(b) doing work of a less outstanding nature but requiring prompt,
honest and intelligent observance of, and obedience to order so
as to be of material assistance in the protection, safeguard
and security of an industrial undertaking;

(c) doing extra hard work in connection with the protection,
safeguard and security of industrial undertaking;

(d) smartness, markmanship, diligence, praiseworthy attention
to the employees and workers of the industrial undertakings or
to the persons who visit the industrial undertakings on business
or for anyother purpose which, in exceptional cases, is
calculated to promote the efficiency of the Force.

(2) Monetary rewards in the form of books or articles of value not
exceeding one thousand rupees for each prize may also be granted
to enrolled members of the Force for proficiency during training
for every batch of trainees who pass out of the Training College
or Training Centre, as specified below :-

I Prize - for all round efficiency, First Rank;

II Prize - for all round efficiency, second rank;

III Prize - for proficiency in parade, musketry and sports.

(ii) Monetary rewards shall not be granted on request.

Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that it shall be permissible to grant also the III Prize to a
trainee who has been granted I Prize or II Prize.

(3) Monetary rewards may be granted to the non-gazetted Government
servants, employees and workers of the industrial undertakings
and the members of the public as an incentive for assisting
the Force.

(i) in the detection of any serious case, or

(ii) in the apprehension of an offender, or

(iii) in resisting a criminal or an anti-social elements; or

(iv) for any other purpose. which is for the etter protection,
safeguard and security of the industrial undertakings.

Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared
that for the purposses of this rule -

(i) 'general good work' shall not be a ground for the grant of
monetary rewards.

[PAGE 36]
(ii) monetary rewards shall not be granted on request.

68. Authorities competent to grant monetary rewards-

(1)The Supervisory officers are empowered, subject to the budget
provisions of the Force, to offer and grant monetary rewards under
rule 67 as prescribed by the Central Govt. from time to time.

(2) A monetary reward under rule 67 shall be granted by an Officer
competent to grant the same if he is of opinion, for reasons to be
recorded in writing that the person fulfils the requirements
in this behalf.

(3) The order granting such monetary reward shall indicate the
reasons therefor and the provisions of rule 67 under which it is
granted.

69. Monetary rewards offered by the Managing Director of the Industrial
undertakings - A supervisory officer of the Force may permit an
enrolled member of the Force to accept monetary reward offered by
a Managing Director of an industrial undertaking for a purpose
relatable to sub-rule (1) of rule 67.

70. Benefits on account of risk of "office"/special Risk of "office"- In
these matters, supervisory officer and enrolled members of the Force
shall be governed by Central Civil Services (Extra Ordinary
Pension) Rules as amended from time to time.

71. Superannuation etc. - The rules relating to superannuation
pension, provident fund and gratuity of supervisory officers and
enrolled members of the Force shall be the same as those applicable
to the Central Government employees.

72. Transfer - (1) Transfers of members of theForce may be made as
under -

(i) of supervisory officers, by the Director General ;

(ii)of and upto the rank of Head Constable from one unit to another
unit under the administrative control of one Commandant, by the
Commandant ;
(iii) of the enrolled members of the Force from one Unit to another
within the Zone by the Deputy Inspector General of that Zone ; and

(iv) of the enrolled members of the Force from one unit to another
unit within the sector by the Inspector General of that sector.

[PAGE 37]
(v) of the enrolled members of the Force from one unit or zone to
another in the entire Force by the Deputy Inspector General
of Force Headquarters.

(2) An authority superior to the authority competent to sub-rule
(1) may make an order of transfer, annul, change or modify any
order of transfer made under sub-rule (1).

73. Payment of charges - The charges payable by an industrial undertaking
in public sector for the deputation of supervisory officers and
enrolled members of the Force under section 14 of the Act to such
undertaking, shall be paid for such periods and in such manner
as the Central Government may from time to time specify.

Explanation - For the purposes of this rule, charges payable
by an industrial undertaking in public sector shall include -

i) the pay and allowances, leave salary contribution and
pension contribution payable to officers and enrolled members
of the Force deputed to that undertaking;

(ii) the cost of clothing, equipment, transport, arms and
ammunitions and other accoutrements necessary for the proper
discharge of the functions of such officers and members; and

(iii) the amount which the Central Government may, having regard
to the number of officers and members of the Force deputed to
the industrial undertaking, determine from time to time, as the
proportionate amount being payable by the industrial
undertaking towards the cost of maintaining the Headquarters
and other establishments of the Force.

74. Non-applicability of rules in certain cases -(1) These rules shall not
apply to enrolled members of the Force taken on contract who shall
be governed by the conditions of their contract.

(2) Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to preclude the President -

(a) from making any appointment to the Force which he may consider
necessary, or

(b) from passing any order or revising, whether on his own motion
or otherwise, any order passed under these rules by any
subordinate authority.

75. Award of Director General's Commendation Disc -

(1) Director General's Commendation Disk will be awarded to the
CISF personnel on the following grounds :

(a) for conspicuous achievement during operations.

[PAGE 38]
(b) commendable work in natural calamities.

(c) outstanding achievement in sports for the country at
international level.

(d) Any innovation which may bring significant improvement in the
working of the Force.

(e) Clean and good record of service for 15 years.

(f) Accident free driving and good record for a continuous period of
20 years.

(g) for being graded "AX" in Army courses of 12 weeks duration or
more.

(h) for any conspicuous efforts in processing of difficult cases.

(i)for any conspicuous work which may be considsered of a
commendable nature.

(j) Recovery of property worth more than Rs.20,000/- in case of
Constable to Head Constable and more than Rs.50,000/- in case
of Assistant-Sub-Inspectors to Inspectors and more than
Rs.1,00,000/- in case of Gazetted Officer's. The property so
recovered should not be of unclaimed nature.

(k) Outstanding action in dealing with terrorists/Criminals
which does not call for award of a gallantry medal.

(l) standing first in Force level professional courses or standing
Ist, 2nd or 3rd in an Inter-Force level training course.

(m) Personnel who have been promoted out of turn owing to some
outstanding work can also be considered.

(2) Detailed instructions on this subject shall be issued separately
from time to time with the approval of Central Government.

76. Ministerial staff -Ministerial staff (Civilian) shall be governed by the
recruitment rules framed under article 309 of the Constitution of India.

77. Other conditions of service - The members of the Force shall, in
respect of all matters regarding conditions of service for which no
provision or insufficient provisions have been made in these rules be
governed by the rules and orders for the time being applicable to
officers holding corresponding posts in the Central Government in
respect of such matters.

C H A P T E R - XIII

[PAGE 39]
MAGISTERIAL POWER FOR THE PURPOSE OF INQUIRING
INTO OR TRYING ANY OFFENCE COMMITTED BY AN
ENROLLED MEMBER OF THE FORCE AND THE OFFENCES
PUNISHABLE UNDER THIS ACT.

78. Magisterial Powers - For the purpose of inquiring into or trying
offences specified in sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the Act and in
respect of all matters incidental to such inquiry or trial of such
offences, every officer holding rank of Commandant or equivalent as
mentioned in sub-clause (iv) of clause (a) of sub-rule (1) of rule 4,
shall exercise the powers of a Magistrate of the first class.

79. Judicial trials - All trials in relation to any of the offences
specified in sub-section (1) of section 18 of the Act shall be held in
accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974).

80. Magistrate - For the purpose of this Chapter 'Magistrate' means
the Commandant on whom the powers of a Magistrate have been conferred
under sub-section 2(A) of section 18 of the Act.

81. Language to be used in the proceedings before Commandant - Either
English or Hindi may be used by the Commandant while exercising the
powers of a Magistrate for inquiring into or trying any offence
under sub-section (1) of section 18 of the Act.

82. Magistrate not to try enrolled members of the Force - where an
enrolled member of the Force is brought before the Magistrate and
charged with an offence referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 18 of
the Act, for which he is liable to be tried, such Magistrate shall
not proceed to inquire into or try the offence unless -

(a) he is of the opinion for reasons to be recorded in writing
that he should so proceed without being moved thereto by the
Unit Commander; or

(b) he is moved thereto by the Unit Commander.

83. Magistrate to give notice - Before proceeding under clause (a) of
rule 82, the Magistrate shall give written notice to the Unit
Commander and until the expiry of a period of 21 days from the date of
service of such notice he shall not :

(a) convict or acquit the accused under Section 252, section
255(1) and (2), section 256 or section 257 of the Code of
Criminal procedure, 1973 or hear him in defence under section 254
of the said Code; or

[PAGE 40]
(b)frame in writing a charge against the accused under section
238 or section 246(1) of the said Code; or

(c) make an order committing the accused for trial by the Court of
Sessions under section 193 of the said Code; or

(d) transfer the case for enquiry or trial under section 192 of
the said Code.

84. Magistrate to be informed of the trial of the accused -

(1) When an accused person has been delivered by the Magistrate, the
Unit Commander shall, as soon as may, inform the Magistrate whether
the accused has been tried by him or any other official proceedings
have been taken, ordered to be taken against the accused or not.

(2) When the Magistrate has been informed under sub-rule(1) that the
accused has not been tried or other official proceedings have not been
taken or ordered to be taken against him, the Magistrate shall
report the circumstances to the Central Government for taking
appropriate steps to ensure that the accused person is dealt with in
accordance with law.

85. Unit Commander to deliver the accused to the Magistrate - Where
an enrolled member of the Force has committed an offence which in
the opinion of the Unit Commander is to be tried by a Magistrate in
accordance with the law in Force, the Unit Commander shall after
giving written notice to the Magistrate concerned, deliver such person
under proper escort to the Magistrate.

86. Manner of imprisonment - Any enrolled member of the Force sentenced to
imprisonment under the Act shall be confined in the nearest jail :

Provided that if the sentence of imprisonment is for one month
or less or where the Unit Commander is satisfied that due to the
difficulty of transport and escort of the enrolled member of the
force sentenced to imprisonment to the nearest jail it is so desirable
such person shall be confined in the Quarter Guard of the Force.

87. Force Custody - (1) Where a Unit Commander is of the opinion that any
enrolled member of the Force has committed an offence and should be
tried by a Commandant who is vested with powers of Magistrate
under section 18(2A) it shall be lawful for such Commandant,
with the prior approval of the Deputy Inspector General to order the
enrolled member of the Force to be taken into Force custody and kept
either in close arrest or open arrest as he may deem fit from time to
time depending on the gravity of the charge and the attending
circumstances;

[PAGE 41]
Provided that no enrolled member of the Force shall be detained
in Force custody for a period of more than eight days without a trial
having been convened by a Commandant/Magistrate or without a
punishment having been awarded to him under section 8 of the Act;

(2) In each unit or group, there shall be one or more places of
confinement, as may be considered necessary by the Deputy
Inspector General where arrested enrolled member of the Force
shall be confined. Such places shall be under the supervision of
the Commandant, Deputy Commandant or Assistant Commandant of the
Unit, who shall be responsible for their upkeep.

(3) If any enrolled member of the Force in Force Custody escapes
or is rescued, the member of the Force from whose custody he
escaped or was rescued shall report the escape or rescue to the
officer-in-charge of Police Station and may immediately
pursue and arrest such enrolled member in any place in India.

88. Promulgation of sentence - The sentence awarded by a Magistrate
shall be promulgated at the earliest opportunity after it has been
pronounced and shall subject to the provisions of the Act be carried out
without delay after promulgation.

89. Transmission of proceedings -(1) The proceeding of every Magistrate
without delay be forwarded to the Deputy Inspector General within whose
command the trial was held for his information.

90. Appeals - Any person convicted on a trial held by a Magistrate under
this Chapter may appeal to the Court of session. The provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 relating to appeals in that code
shall apply to appeals under this rule.

C H A P T E R - XIV

91. Technical consultancy services to the industrial establishments in the
private sector - (a) The Central Industrial Security Force may
provide technical consultancy services to industrial establishments in
the Central/State Government Departments, Public/Joint/Private sector,
autonomous bodies or any other institution approved by the
Government which may cover :

(i) Study of industrial security and fire protection related
problems and suggesting appropriate solutions.

(ii) Imparting of knowledge and skills in the field of industrial
security and fire protection to the consulter (hereinafter called

[PAGE 42]
client) or his employees through training programmes which may be
conducted at Central Industrial Security Force Training Institutions
or at the client's industrial establishments(s) or at any other
place as deemed appropriate by the Director General.

(iii) To conduct training and certification courses in the
fields of Industrial Safety, Security and Fire protection
and charge prescribed fees for the same. The fees for
various such courses will be determined by the Director General.

(iv) Planning, designing and effecting industrial security and fire
protection schemes measures, controls and systems for the client.

(v) Providing feed back after monitoring the functioning of
suggested measures, controls and systems.

(vi) Planning and designing of communication network and
preparation of related operating instructions.

(vii) Drafting industrial security and fire protection related
instructions, standing orders and standing operating procedures.

(viii) Preparing disaster management and contingency plan and
supervising or conducting rehearsals of such plans.

(ix) Conducting audits in the field of industrial security,
industrial safety or fire safety.

(x) Undertaking research and development activities independently
or in collaboration with the clients and or other reputed agencies in
the field of industrial security, industrial safety and fire
protection and related matters.

(b) On receipt of request from the Managing Director of any Industrial
Establishment in the Private Sector or any other person authorized by
him; in this behalf, subject to any general directions issued by
the Central Government, the Director General if deems it
appropriate, after examination of the request, may forward terms and
conditions of providing Technical Consultancy services to the
Managing Director or any other person authorized by him and may ask
to remit prescribed fee for technical cosultancy services.

(c) On remitance of prescribed fees from the Managing Director of an
industrial establishment in the Private Sector, the Director General
may nominate any officers of the force or constitute a team of
Officers for conducting technical study of the concerned industrial
establishment relating to any matter enumerated in sub rule (i) to (x)
of rule- 91(a).

(d) The Director General may, if deems it appropriate and if the nature
of consultancy sought so requires, also associate any person(s)
expert in the field, expertise whereof is not available with the
officers of the force, with the team constituted under sub rule (c).

[PAGE 43]
(e) The expert person associated with the team under provisions of sub
rule (d) shall be paid such amount as deemed appropriate considering
his/her expertise, contribution in terms of period of time, services
and state of availability of such experts in the given circumstances.

(f) The officer so nominated or the team so constituted by the
Director General under sub rule (c) shall prepare a report after
conducting such study as they may deem appropriate and submit the
same to the Director General. After due approval of Director General
of the Force, the consultancy report, so prepared will be
communicated to the Managing Director of concerned industrial
establishment in the Private Sector or to the person authorized by him
in this behalf.

(g)The consultancy report so prepared for client(s)establishment shall
be the property of that establishment and such reports shall not be
used by any member of the Force or by such person associated
with the consultancy board for any personal benefit. Such reports,
however, can be used for academic purposes.

(h)CONSULTANCY FEE - The consultancy fees shall be charged from the
Industrial Establishments in the Private Sector as prescribed from
time to time.

92. Repeal and Saving - (1) The Central Industrial Security Force Rules,
1969 are hereby repealed.

(2)Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken
under the said rules, shall be deemed to have been done or taken
under the corresponding provisions of these rules.

***************

APPENDIX " A "

See Rule - 21

FROM OF AGREEMENT

[PAGE 44]
To,

The President of India

In consideration of the President of India having
agreed to appoint me as

-------------------------------
* an Inspector |
* a Sub-Inspector |
* an Asstt.sub-Inspector | in the Central Industrial
* a Head Constable | Security Force.
* a Constable |
|
------------------------------

I..............................Son
of................................. hereby agree and undertake to :

(i) serve in the Central Industrial Security force for a period of not
less than ten years with effect from the date of my appointment in
the force;

(ii) Carry out all duties entrusted to me and all lawful orders
given to me by my susperiors in rank;

(iii) refund all the cost of training imparted to me in the Force or
a sum equal to three months'pay and allowances whichever is more
in the event of tendering my resignation from the Force for
reasons other than accepting a job elsewhere for which cadre
clearance has been given,during the period of my initial training or
thereafter during the period of ten years from the date of joining
Central Industrial Security Force; and

(iv) if, after ten years I desire to resign, I will submit my
request in writing and will not withdraw from my duties until I
am duly relieved.

NOTE : The terms pay and allowance used in clause (iii) above means
the usual pay and allowances received by him during the
period of three months immediately prior to the date of
his resignation.

* Strike out whichever is not applicable.

Witness

[PAGE 45]
Signature :--------------- . Signature of the employees

Designation:---------------- ...........................

Date :---------------- Designation:................

Place :--------------- Date :................

Place :................

ACCEPTED

for and on behalf of the
President of India.

APPENDIX " B "

(See Rule - 30)

[PAGE 46]
" I .................................do solemnly affirm that I

will be faithful and bear true allegiance to India and to the

Constitution of India as by law established and that I will carry

out the duties of my office loyally, honestly and with

impartiality."

Signature --------------------
Signature and designation of
the Supervisory Officer (in
whose presence the affirmation
is made)

APPENDIX " C "

See Rule - 17

(MEDICAL EXAMINATION REPORT)

[PAGE 47]
(FOR GROUP C AND GROUP D CISF PERSONNEL)

|-------------------|
| |
| Photo of candidate|
|attested by the |
PART- 1 | Chairmen of the |
| Chairman of the |
PART -1 | Recruitment board |
| |
| |
|-------------------|

Form to be used when a candidate is granted authority to present
himself for medical examination for fitness on appointment.

Name......................... Caste or Race .....................

Residence .......................................................

Father's name and residence .....................................

Date of Birth by Christain era as nearly as can be ascertained

Exact height by measurement: Hight.....................

Chest.....................

weight.....................

Signature of the individual ...................................

Station...................... Signature of Appointing Officer

Date......................... designation.....................

PART - 2

CANDIDATES STATEMENT AND DECLARATION

[PAGE 48]
The candidate must make the statement required below,prior
to his medical examination and must sign the declaration
appended thereto.His attention is specially directed to the
warning contained in the note below :-

1. (a) Have you ever had a small pox,intermittent or any other
fever,Enlargement or suppuration of glands,spitting of
blood as heart disease,fainting,attach rheumatish ?

(b) Any other disease or accident requiring confinement to
bed and prolonged medical or surgical treatment.

2. When you were last vaccinated ?

3. Have you or any other relative been affected with
consumption,sorofulous, gout asthma, fits, epilepsy or
insanity ?

4. have you suffered from any form of nervousness due to
overwork or any other cause ?

5. Have you been examined and declared unfit for
Government service by medical officer/medical Board
within the last three years.

I declare that all the above answers are to the best of
my belief true and correct.I also solemnly affirm that I have not
received disability /certificate/pension on account of a any
disease or other condition.

Candidate's Signature ..........

Signed in my presence...........
-----------------------------------------------------------------
NOTE :- The candidate will be held responsible for accuracy of
the above statement,by willfully supressing any
Information will incur the risk or losing the
appointment and if appointed of forfeiting all the
superanuation allowances or gratuity.

PART- 3

It is certified that I/We have examined ......................S/o
..................................... a candidate for employment in

[PAGE 49]
the Central Industrial Security Force and can not discover that he has any
disease,constitutional afflication or bodily infirmity excluding knock
knee,flat feet and ............I/We considered /do not considered this a
disqualificatio for employment in Central industrial Security Force. His age
according to his own statement is

-----------------------------------------------------------------

This may be filled up after examining the candidate for knock
knee,flat feet, bow legs, squint eyes,inability close the left eye,inability
to flax the fingers properly,varicose veins or any other obvious
disabilities which are likely to affect his functioning as a member of the
Central Industrial Security Force.

1. General Development Good Fair Poor

2. Body built Thin Average Obese

3. Eyes Right Left

(A) Any obvious Disease
(i) External
(ii) Media

(B) Visual Acuity .................................
(i) Distant
(ii) Near

(C) Colour Vision

4. Ear, Nose & Throat Right Left

(a) Any obvious disease

(b) Hearing

(c) PNS

5. Condition of teeth ...............Dental points ...........

6. Respiratoury System
(i) Appearance of Chest
(ii) Breathing Rate
(iii) Any abnormality on stethescopic examination.

7. (A) Circulatory System
Heart : Any organic lesion ....................

[PAGE 50]
Rate : Standing ..............................
After hopping 25 times ...................
2 Minutes after hopping...................

(B) Blood pressure
Systolic .......................
Disstolic.......................

8. Abdomen

(a) Tenderness -------------------

(b) Palpability
(i) Liver :
(ii) Spleen :
(iii) Kidneys:

(c) Hacmorrhoids :

(d) Fissure/fistula :

(e) Hernia/Hydrocele

(f) Any other :

9. Locomotor System :
(i) Condition of spine
(ii) candition of limb joints :

10. Nervous System
(i) Evidence of nervous instability :
(ii) Tremers :
(iii) History of Mental Disease :

11. Report of Radiological examination of chest if done :

12. Is there anything in the health of candidate likely to
render him unfit for the efficient discharge of his duties on the
service for which he is a candidate ?

13. State the service for which the candidate has been examined
(GD/Follower/Trades/Communication/Medical etc)

14. small pox vaccination marks (Give number & site)

15. Mild defects noted,not sufficient for rejection

16. Out line reasons declaring candidate unfit.

17. UNFIT/TEMPORARY UNFIT/FIT

[PAGE 51]
Signature of the candidate

Place:..................

Date :..................

Signature of Medical Officer with date

1. ...............................

2. ...............................

Appendix -'D'

DISCHARGE CERTIFICATE

[PAGE 52]
(Under Rule 59 of CISF Rules,2001)

P A R T I C U L A R

1. Name

2. Father's Name

3. Religion

4. Whether Schedule Cast/Schedule Tribe

5. Date of Birth

6. Identification mark, if any

7. Branch of the CISF in which deployed
(Executive/Fire/Ministerial)

8. Period of Service from ........... to ............

9. Date of issue of appointment certificate
(See Section 6 (1) of CISF Act, 1968 as
modified by Act, 1983 and 1989).

10. Date of surrender of certificate referred
to in item 9 above(Scc Section 6(2)of the
CISF Act, 1968 as amended by Act, 1983 and 1989).

11. Post held immediately prior to ceasing to
be the member in the service.

12. Pay prior to ceasing to be member in the
service.

13. Reasons for discharge

14. Medals/Decorations awarded

15. Character

16. Employee's signature or
thumb impression.

Place : Signature and designation
Date : of Supervisory Officer.

Following criteria will be adoptad for assessment of"Character"
in the discharge certificate :-
-----------------------------------------------------------------

S.No. Category of Conditions

[PAGE 53]
assissment
-----------------------------------------------------------------
1. Exemplary (i) Minimum 10 years service with
the Central Industrial Security
Force.
(ii) No. punishment under the Central
Industrial Security Force
Act or in civil/criminal Court.
(iii) Quality of ACR.

2. Very good (i) Minimum 7 years service with
the Central Industrial Security
Force.
(ii) No. punishment under section
8(i) and 18 of Central Industrial
Security Force Act or in
the Civil/Criminal Court.
(iii) Quality of ACR.

3. Good (i) At last 3 year's service with
the Central Industrial Security
Force without any major or
minor punishment under Central
Industrial Security Force
Act and Rules.
(ii) No. reduction in rank or grade
for an offence under the Central
Industrial Security Force
Act and Rules.
(iii) Quality of ACR.

4. Fair (i) Not more than one reducation in
rank or grade for offence under
the Central Industrial Security
Force Act and Rules.

5. Bad (i) Cases not coverd under item
(1) to (4) above.
(ii) More than two reduction in rank
or grade for offence under
Central Industrial Security Force
Act and Rules.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

SCHEDULE - I
SCHEDULE OF DISCIPLINARY AUTHORITIES AND THEIR POWERS TO PASS DIFFFERENT
DISCIPLINARY ORDERS IN RESPECT OF DIFFERENT CLASSES AND GRADES AND RANKS OF
MEMBERS OF THE FORCE

[PAGE 54]
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------
DISCIPLINARY AUTHORITIES AND
EXTENT OF THEIR POWER

SL NATURE OF DISCIPLINARY ORDER DIRECTOR GENERAL SECTOR
INSPECTOR DY.INSPECTOR COMMANDANT DY.COMMANDANT
ASSTT.COMMANDANT
NO
GENERAL/INSPECTOR GENERAL
GENERAL
(HQrs)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------
1. Suspension All enrolled All enrolled All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled member of the member of the
member of The member of the member of the member of the force
force force force force force

2. Dismissal All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled --
-member of the member of
the member of the member of the force
force force
force Excepting Inspector

3. Removal All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled --
-member of the member of
the member of the member of the force
force force
force Excepting Inspector

4. Compulsory Retirement All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled --
-member of the member of
the member of the member of the force
force force
force Excepting Inspector

5. Reduction of pay grade All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled --
-or rank member of the member of
the member of the member of the force
force force
force Excepting Inspector

[PAGE 55]
6. Reduction to a lower stage All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled All enrolled
All enrolled
in the time scale of pay for member of the member of
the member of the member of the member of the
member of the
a period of not exceeding force force
force force force
force
three years,with out cumulative
effect and not adversely
effecting his pension.

- 60 -

7. With holding of promotion All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled All enrolled
All enrolled
member of the member of
the member of the member of the member of the
member of the
force force
force force force
force

[PAGE 56]
8. With holding of increment All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled All enrolled
All enrolled
member of the member of
the member of the member of the member of the
member of the
force force
force force force
force

9. Removal from an office of All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled All enrolled
All enrolled
distinction or deprivation member of the member of
the member of the member of the member of the
member of the
of special emoluments. force force
force force force
force

10. Fine to an amount not All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled All enrolled
All enrolled
exceeding seven days pay member of the member of
the member of the member of the member of the
member of the
force force
force force force
force

11. censure All enrolled All
enrolled All enrolled All enrolled All enrolled
All enrolled
member of the member of
the member of the member of the member of the
member of the
force force
force force force
force

12. Punishment,drill, Head Constable/ Head
Constable/ Head Constable/ Head Constable/ Head Constable/
Head Constable/
extra guard,fatigue, Constable/
Constable/ Constable/ Constable/ Constable/
Constable/
or other duty. Followers Followers
Followers Followers Followers.
Followers.

[PAGE 57]
INDEX

CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE RULES, 1969
(AS MODIFIED BY SO No. DT. )

CHAPTER - I

Preliminary

[PAGE 58]
RULES

Rules Page

1. Short title and commencement 1

2. Definitions 1 - 2

CHAPTER - II

Composition of the Force

3. Constitution of the Force 2

4. Composition of the Force 2 - 4

5. Duties of Director General in CISF 4 - 5

6. Duties of Inspector General in CISF 5 - 6

7. Duties of Dy.Inspector General in CISF 6 - 7

8. Duties of Managing Director & General Manager 7

9. Duties of Commandant in CISF 7

10. Duties of Deputy Commandant in CISF 8

11. Duties of Asstt Comdt in CISF 8

CHAPTER -III

Procedure of Arrest,Search etc.

12. Arrest 8 - 9

13. Search 9

14. Prescribed rank 9

CHAPTER - IV

Recruitment of the Force

15. Power of appointment 9

16. Condition of eligibility for the appointment
of the Force 9- 10

[PAGE 59]
17. Disqualification 10

18. Name of posts, their classifications,
Scale of pay, method of recruitment, age
limit and other qualification 10

19. Agreement 10

20. Cadre 11

CHAPTER - V

Deputation, Promotion and Probation, etc.

21. Repleaded 11

22. Promotion 11

22(A) Seniority 11-12

23. Probation 12

23 (A) Termination 13

CHAPTER - VI

Special Provisions

24. Special Provisions for certain categories
of persons 13

CHAPTER - VII

Condition of Service and Conduct

25. Training Manual 14

26. Solemn affirmation of allegiance 14

27. Rules covering discipline 14

28. Disciplinary Authority 14 - 15

29. Suspension 15 - 16

30. Penalties 16 - 18
- Major

[PAGE 60]
- Minor

31. Petty Punishments 19

32. Procedure for imposing major penalties 19 - 24

33. Procedure for imposing minor penalties 24 - 25

34. Procedure for imposing petty punishments 25

35. Special Procedure in certain cases 25

36. Provisions regarding enrolled members
of the Force borrowed from State
Governments, etc. 25 - 26

37. Provisions regarding enrolled members
of the Force lent to State Govts., etc. 27 - 28

38. Reduction in rank, etc. 28

39. Withholding of increments 28

CHAPTER - VIII

Appeals, Revisions and Petitions

40. Appeal against order of suspension 28

41. Orders against which no appeal lies 28

42. Appeal against order imposing penalties 28 - 29

43. Period of limitation for appeals 29

44. Form of contents of appeal and procedure
of submission of appeals 29 - 30

45. Withholding of appeals 30

46. Transmission of appeals 30

47. Consideration of appeals 30 - 31

48. Implementation of appeals 31

49. Revision 32

50. Dies-non 32

[PAGE 61]
51. The petitions 32 - 33

52. Other methods forbidden 33

CHAPTER - IX

Magisterial Power

53. Magisterial Powers 33

54. Judicial trials 33

55. Magistrate 33

56. Language to be used in the proceedings
before Commandant 33

57. Magistrate not to try enrolled member
of the Force 33 - 34

58. Magistrate to give notice 34

59. Magistrate to be informed of the trial
of the accused 34

60. Commandant to deliver the accused to
the Magistrate 35

61. Manner of imprisonment 35

62. Force Custody 35 - 36

63. Promulgation of sentence 36

64. Transmission of proceedings 36

65. Appeals 36

CHAPTER - X

Miscellaneous

66. Resignation 36

67. Discharge Certificate 36

[PAGE 62]
68. Surrender of Certificate of Appointment 37

69. Free Accommodation 37

70. Medical facilities 37 - 38

71. Leave 38

72. Recall from leave 38

73. Free leave pass and Leave Travel Concession 38 - 39

74. Power to grant monetary rewards 39

74-A. Eligibility for monetary rewards 39 - 41

74-B. Authorities competent to grant
monetary rewards 41

74-C. Monetary rewards offered by the Managing
Directors of the Industrial Undertakings 41

75. Benefit on account of risk of officers/
Special risk of office 41

76. Superannuation, etc. 41

77. Transfers 41 - 42

78. Payment of charges 42

79. Non-applicability of rules in certain cases 42 - 43

80. Award of Director General's Commendation Disc 43 - 44

81. Other conditions of service 44

CHAPTER - XI

Repeal and Savings

82. Repeal and Savings 44

C H A P T E R - XII

MISCELLANEOUS

58. Resignation - (1) The appointing authority may
during the period of probation or thereafter

[PAGE 63]
permit any member of the Force to resign from his
post with effect from such date as may be
specified in the order accepting his resignation:

Provided that before acceptance of
resignation of any such member of the force up to
the period of ten years from the date of
appointment in the Force, for reasons other than
accepting a job elsewhere for which cadre
clearance has been given, shall be required to
refund the cost of training imparted to him in
the Force or a sum equal to three months' pay and
allowances, whichever is more.

(2) The resignation of a member of the Force
who is under trial or whose conduct is under
inquiry may be refused.