[PAGE 1]
xfrRA ee Se Wer —(T)04/0007/2003—16 ___ REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—16
yh
JR «a tsa
TATA
EXTRAORDINARY
wt 1— we 1
PART II — Section 1
wit & warfare
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
53] 7g fare, eran, Stet 28, 2016/ WR 6, 1938 (We)
No. 53] NEW DELHI, SUNDAY, AUGUST 28, 2016/BHADRA 6, 1938 (SAKA)
a TF fret Ys Her St ort B fra fe ae Her SHE S ST A TA HM AF |
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 28th August, 2016/Bhadra 6, 1938 (Saka)
THE ENEMY PROPERTY (AMENDMENT AND
VALIDATION) FOURTH ORDINANCE, 2016
NO. 7 OF 2016

Promulgated by the President in the Sixty-seventh Year of
the Republic of India.

An Ordinance further to amend the Enemy Property Act,
1968 and the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971.

WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Ordinance, 2016 was promulgated by the
President on the 7th day of January, 2016;

AND WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Bill, 2016 to replace the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016 has been
passed by the House of the People and is pending in the
Council of States;

[PAGE 2]
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I~

AND WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Bill, 2016 was referred to the Select Committee

. of the Rajya Sabha for its examination and report;

AND WHEREAS in order to give continued effect to the
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance,
2016, the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation)
Second Ordinance was promulgated by the President on the
2nd April, 2016;

AND WHEREAS the Select Committee submitted its
Report, along with the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Bill, 2016 incorporating therein the amendments
recommended by the said Committee, on the 6th May, 2016;

. AND WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Bill, 2016, as reported by the Select Committee,
could not be taken up for consideration and passing in the ‘
Council of States;

AND WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Third Ordinance, 2016 incorporating the
recommendations of the Select Committee was promulgated
by the President on the 31st May, 2016 which will cease to

Operate on the 28th day of August, 2016;

AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give
continued effect to the provisions of the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Third Ordinance, 2016 along
with the amendments as recommended by the Select
Committee;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the
President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it
necessary for him to take immediate action;

NOW, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by
clause (1) of article 123 of the Constitution, the President is
pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance:-—

Short title and 1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Enemy Property
commencement. (Amendment and Validation) Fourth Ordinance, 2016.

(2) Save as otherwise provided, it shall be deemed to have

come into force on the 7" day of January, 2016.

[PAGE 3]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
2. On and from the date of commencement of the Enemy Amendment of
34 of 1968. Property Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as the principal section 2.
Act), in section 2,—
(i) in clause (b),—

(D) for the words “an enemy subject”, the words “an
enemy subject including his legal heir and successor
whether or not a citizen of India or the citizen of a country
which is not an enemy or the enemy, enemy subject or his
legal heir and successor who has changed his nationality”
shall be substituted and shall always be deemed to have
been substituted;

U7) for the words “an enemy firm”, the words “an
enemy firm, including its succeeding firm whether or not
partners or members of such succeeding firm are citizens
of India or citizens of a country which is not an enemy or
such firm which has changed its nationality” shall be
substituted and shall always be deemed to have been
substituted;

(ID) for the words “does not include a citizen of
India”, the words ‘ “does not include a citizen of India
other than those citizens of India, being the legal heir and
successor of the “enemy” or “enemy subject” or “enemy
firm” ’ shall be substituted and shall always be deemed to
have been substituted;

UV) the following Explanations shall be inserted and
shall always be deemed to have been inserted at the end,
namely:—

‘Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this clause,
the expression “does not include a citizen of India”
shall exclude and shall always be deemed to have
been excluded those citizens of India, who are or have
been the legal heir and successor of an “enemy” or an
“enemy subject” or an “enemy firm” which or who has
ceased to be an enemy due to death, extinction, winding
up of business or change of nationality or that the legal
heir and successor is a citizen of India or the citizen of
a country which is not an enemy.

[PAGE 4]
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—

Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this clause, it

is hereby clarified that nothing contained in this Act

shall affect any right of the legal heir and successor

referred to in this clause (not being inconsistent to the

provisions of this Act) which have been conferred upon

him under any other law for the time being in force.’;
(ii) in clause (c), in the proviso,—

() after the words “dies in the territories to which this
Act extends”, the words “or dies in any territory outside
India” shall be inserted and shall always be deemed to
have been inserted;

CD the following Explanations shall be inserted and
shall always be deemed to have been inserted at the end,
namely:—

‘Explanation |.— For the purposes of this clause,
it is hereby clarified that “enemy property” shall,
notwithstanding that the enemy or the enemy subject
or the enemy firm has ceased to be an enemy due to
death, extinction, winding up of business or change of
nationality or that the legal heir and successor is a
citizen of India or the citizen of a country which is not
an enemy, continue and always be deemed to be
continued as an enemy property.

Explanation 2.— For the purposes of this clause,
the expression “enemy property” shall mean and
include and shall be deemed to have always meant and
included all rights, titles and interests in, or any
benefit arising out of, such property.’.

Amendment of 3. On and from the date of commencement of the

section 5. principal Act, in section 5, after sub-section (2), the following
shall be inserted, and shall always be deemed to have been
inserted, namely:—

*(3) The enemy property vested in the Custodian shall,
notwithstanding that the enemy or the enemy subject or
the enemy firm has ceased to be an enemy due to death,
extinction, winding up of business or change of
nationality or that the legal heir and successor is a citizen
of India or the citizen of a country which is not an enemy,
continue to remain, save as otherwise provided in this Act,
vested in the Custodian.

[PAGE 5]
Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section,

“enemy property vested in the Custodian” shall include

and shall always be deemed to have been included all

rights, titles, and interests in, or any benefit arising out of,

such property vested in him under this Act.’.

4. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following Insertion of new
section shall be inserted, namely:— section SA.

“5A. The Custodian may, after making such inquiry Issue of certificate
as he deems necessary, by order, declare that the property by Custodian.

of the enemy or the enemy subject or the enemy firm

described in the order, vests in him under this Act and

issue a certificate to this effect and such certificate shall

be the evidence of the facts stated therein.”.

5. On and from the date of commencement of the Insertion ofnew
principal Act, after section SA [as so inserted by section 4 of section 5B.
the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance,

2016], the following shall be inserted and shall always be
deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
‘5B. Nothing contained in any law for the time being Law of

in force relating to succession or any custom or usage Succession or any

governing succession of property shall apply in relation to custom seta.

the enemy property under this Act and no person onemy proven.

(including his legal heir and successor) shall have any

right and shall be deemed not to have any right (including

all rights, titles and interests in, or any benefit arising out

of, such property) in relation to such enemy property.

Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the

expressions "custom" and "usage" signify any rule which,

having been continuously and uniformly observed for a

long time, has obtained the force of law in the matters of

succession of property.’.

6. On and from the date of commencement of the Amendment of
principal Act, for section 6 of the principal Act, the following section 6.
section shall be substituted and shall always be deemed to
have been substituted, namely:—

[PAGE 6]
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Par I~
Prohibition to “6. (1) No enemy or enemy subject or enemy firm
transfer any shall have any right and shall never be deemed to have
property vested any right to transfer any property vested in the Custodian
in Custodian by : : .
an enemy, under this Act, whether before or after the commencement
enemy subject of this Act and any transfer of such property shall be void
or enemy firm. and shall always be deemed to have been void.

(2) Where any property vested in the Custodian under
this Act had been transferred, before the commencement
of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation)
Fourth Ordinance, 2016, by an enemy or enemy subject
or enemy firm and such transfer has been declared, by an
order, made by the Central Government, to be void, and
the property had been vested or deemed to have been
vested in the Custodian [by virtue of the said order made
under section 6, as it stood before its substitution by
section 6 of the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Fourth Ordinance, 2016] such property shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment,
decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority,
continue to vest or be deemed to have been vested in the
Custodian and no person (including an enemy or enemy .
subject or enemy firm) shall have any right or deemed to
have any right (including all rights, titles and interests in,
or any benefit arising out of, such property) over the said
property vested or deemed to have been vested in the
Custodian.”.

Amendment 7. In section 8 of the principal Act,—
of section 8.

(i) on and from the date of commencement of the
principal Act, for sub-section (J), the following subsection shall be substituted and shall always be deemed to
have been substituted, namely:—

“(1) With respect to the property vested in the

Custodian under this Act, the Custodian may take or

authorise the taking of such measures as he considers

necessary or expedient for preserving such property
till it is disposed of in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.”;

(ii) in sub-section (2),—

(a) after clause (7), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—

[PAGE 7]
“Ga) fix and collect the rent, standard rent,
lease rent, licence fee or usage charges, as the case
may be, in respect of enemy property;”;
(b) after clause (iv), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(iva) secure vacant possession of the enemy
property by evicting the unauthorised or illegal
occupant or trespasser and remove unauthorised or
illegal constructions, if any.”.
8. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following Insertion of new
section shall be inserted, namely:— section 8A.
“8A.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any Sale of property
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other by Custodian.
authority or any law for the time being in force, the
Custodian may, within such time as may be specified by
the Central Government in this behalf, dispose of whether
by sale or otherwise, as the case may be, with prior
, approval of the Central Government, by general or special
order, enemy properties vested in him immediately before
the date of commencement of the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Fourth Ordinance, 2016 in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, as amended by
the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Fourth
Ordinance, 2016.
(2) The Custodian may, for the purpose of disposal of
enemy property under sub-section (/), make requisition of
the services of any police officer to assist him and it shall
be the duty of such officer to comply with such
requisition.
(3) The Custodian shall, on disposal of enemy
property under sub-section (/) immediately deposit the
sale proceeds into the Consolidated Fund of India and
intimate details thereof to the Central Government.
(4) The Custodian shall send a report to the Central
Government at such intervals, as it may specify, for the
enemy properties disposed of under sub-section (J),
containing such details (including the price for which
such property has been sold and the particulars of the
buyer to whom the properties have been sold or disposed

[PAGE 8]
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
of and the details of the proceeds of sale or disposal
deposited into the Consolidated Fund of India), as it may
specify.

(5) The Central Government may, by general or
special order, issue such directions to the Custodian on
the matters relating to disposal of enemy property under
sub-section (7) and such directions shall be binding upon
the Custodian and the buyer of the enemy properties
referred to in that sub-section and other persons
connected to such sale or disposal.

(6) The Central Government may, by general or
special order, make such guidelines for disposal of enemy
property under sub-section (/).

(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
section, the Central Government may direct that disposal
of enemy property under sub-section (/) shall be made by
any other authority or Ministry or Department instead of
Custodian and in that case all the provisions of this
section shall apply to such authority or Ministry or
Department in respect of disposal of enemy property
under sub-section (/).

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsections (/) to (7), the Central Government may deal with
or utilise the enemy property in such manner as it may
deem fit.”.

Insertion of 9. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following

OA section section shall be inserted, namely:—

Power to issue “10A. (1) Where the Custodian proposes to sell any

certificate of enemy immovable property vested in him, to any person,

sale. he may on receipt of the sale proceeds of such property,
issue a certificate of sale in favour of such person and
such certificate of sale shall, notwithstanding the fact that
the original title deeds of the property have not been
handed over to the transferee, be valid and conclusive
proof of ownership of such property by such person.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law
for the time being in force, the certificate of sale, referred
to in sub-section (/), issued by the Custodian shall be a
valid instrument for the registration of the property in

[PAGE 9]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
favour of the transferee and the registration in respect of

enemy property for which such certificate of sale had

been issued by the Custodian, shall not be refused on the

ground of lack of original title deeds in respect of such

property or for any such other reason.”.

10. In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-section Amendment of
(2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— section 11.

“(3) The Custodian, Deputy Custodian or Assistant

Custodian shall have, for the purposes of exercising

powers or discharging his functions under this Act, the

same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code ;

5 of 1908. of Civil Procedure,1908, while dealing with any case
under this Act, in respect of the following matters,
namely:—

(a) requiring the discovery and inspection of
documents;

(6) enforcing the attendance of any person, ;
including any officer dealing with land, revenue and
registration matters, banking officer or officer of a
company and examining him on oath;

(c) compelling the production of books, documents
and other records; and ,

(d) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or documents.”.

11. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), Amendment of
for the words “two per centum”, at both the places where they Section 17.
occur, the words "five per centum” shall be substituted.

12. For section 18 of the principal Act, the following Substitution of
section shall be substituted, namely:— new section for

section 18.

“{8. The Central Government may, on receipt of a Transter of
representation from a person, aggrieved by an order Property vested as
vesting a property as enemy property in the Custodian ey Pree
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of :
such order or from the date of its publication in the

Official Gazette, whichever is earlier and after giving a

reasonable opportunity of being heard, if it is of the

opinion that any enemy property vested in the Custodian

[PAGE 10]
jo THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _[Pawr I=
under this Act and remaining with him was not an enemy
property, it may by general or special order, direct the
Custodian that such property vested as enemy property in
the Custodian may be transferred to the person from
whom such property was acquired and vested in the
Custodian.”.
Insertion of new 13. On and from the date of commencement of the
section 8A. principal Act, after section 18 [as so substituted by section 12
of the Enemy Property (Amendment and _ Validation)
Ordinance, 2016], the following section shall be inserted and
shall always be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
Income not “18A. Any income received in respect of the enemy
liable to be property by the Custodian shall not, notwithstanding that
returned, such property had been transferred by way of sale under
section 8A or section 18, as the case may be, to any other
person, be returned or liable to be returned to such person
or any other person.”.
Insertion of new 14. After section 18A of the principal Act [as so inserted
sections 18B by section 13 of the Enemy Property (Amendment and
and 18C. Validation) Ordinance, 2016], the following sections shall be Ord 1 of 2016.
inserted, namely:—
Exclusion of ‘18B. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no civil
Jurisdiction of court or authority shall have jurisdiction to entertain any
civil courts. suit or proceedings in respect of any property, subject
matter of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Fourth Ordinance, 2016, or
any action taken by the Central Government or the
Custodian in this regard.
Appeal to High 18C. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Central
Court. Government under section 18 of this Act, may, within a
period of sixty days from the date of communication or
; receipt of the order, file an appeal to the High Court on
any question of fact or law arising out of such orders, and
upon such appeal the High Court may, after hearing the
parties, pass such orders thereon as it thinks proper:
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from.
filing an appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed
within a further period not exceeding sixty days.

[PAGE 11]
Explanation.—In this section, “High Court” means the
High Court of a State or Union territory in which the
property referred to in section 18 is situated.’.

15. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words “five Amendment of
hundred rupees” at both the places where they occur, the words section 20.
“ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted.

16. On and from the date of commencement of the Amendment of
principal Act, in section 22 of the principal Act, after the section 22.
words “for the time being in force”, the brackets and words
“(including any law of succession or any custom or usage in
relation to succession of property)” shall be inserted and shall
always be deemed to have been inserted.

17. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following Insertion of new
section shall be inserted and shall always be deemed to have section 22.
been inserted with effect from the 2nd July, 2010, namely:—

“22A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any Validation.
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other
authority,—

(a) the provisions of this Act, as amended by the

Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Fourth

Ordinance, 2016, shall have and shall always be

deemed to have effect for all purposes as if the

provisions of this Act, as amended by the said

Ordinance, had been in force at all material times;

(6) any enemy property divested from the

Custodian to any person under the provisions of this

Act, as it stood immediately before the commencement

of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation)

Fourth Ordinance, 2016, shall stand transferred to and

vest or continue to vest, free from all encumbrances, in

the Custodian in the same manner as it was vested in

the Custodian before such divesting of enemy property

under the provisions of this Act, as if the provisions of

this Act, as amended by the aforesaid Ordinance, were

in force at all material times:

(c) no suit or other proceedings shall, without
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
be maintained or continued in any court or tribunal or

[PAGE 12]
12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part I—
authority for the enforcement of any decree or order or
direction given by such court or tribunal or authority
directing divestment of enemy property from the
Custodian vested in him under section 5 of this Act, as
it stood before the commencement of the Enemy
Property (Amendment and _ Validation) Fourth
Ordinance, 2016, and such enemy property shall
continue to vest in the Custodian under section 5 of
this Act, as amended by the aforesaid Ordinance, as if
the said section, as amended by the aforesaid
Ordinance was in force at all material times;

(d) any transfer of any enemy property, vested in
the Custodian, by virtue of any order of attachment,
seizure or sale in execution of decree of a civil court or
orders of any tribunal or other authority in respect of
enemy property vested in the Custodian which is
contrary to the provisions of this Act, as amended by
the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation)
Fourth Ordinance, 2016, shall be deemed to be null and
void and notwithstanding such transfer, continue to
vest in the Custodian under this Act.”.

Amendment of 18. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),

section 23. clause (d) shall be omitted.

Power to 19. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the

remove provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the Enemy

difficulties. Property (Amendment and Validation) Fourth Ordinance,

2016, the Central Government may, by order, published in the

Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with

the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Fourth Ordinance, 2016, or the

Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 40 of 1971.
1971, as amended by the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Fourth Ordinance, 2016, as may appear to be

necessary for removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made under this
section afier the expiry of two years from the date on which
the Bill replacing the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Fourth Ordinance, 2016, receives the assent of the
President.

(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament.

[PAGE 13]
20. In the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Amendment of
Occupants) Act,1971,— sections 2 and 3
of Act 40 of 1971.
(a) in section 2, in clause (e), after sub-clause (3), the
following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(4) any premises of the enemy property as defined
34 of 1968. in clause (c) of section 2 of the Enemy Property Act,
1968.”;
(8) in section 3, in clause (a),—
(i) in the second proviso, the word “and” shall be
omitted;
(ii) after the second proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that the Custodian, Deputy
Custodian and Assistant Custodian of the enemy
property appointed under section 3 of the Enemy
34 of 1968. Property Act, 1968 shall be deemed to have been
appointed as the Estate Officer in respect of those
enemy property, being the public premises, referred to
in sub-clause (4) of clause (e) of section 2 of this Act
for which they had been appointed as the Custodian,
Deputy Custodian and Assistant Custodian under
section 3 of the Enemy Property Act, 1968.”.
21. Notwithstanding the cessation of the operation of the Savings.
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance,
ree 2010, anything done or any action taken under the Enemy
, Property Act, 1968, or the Public Premises (Eviction of
40 of 1971. Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, as amended by the
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance,
2010, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of those Acts, as amended by the
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance,
2010, as if the provisions of this Act, as amended by the said
Ordinance had been in force at all material times.
Ord. 6 of 2016. 22. (1) The Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Repeal and
Third Ordinance, 2016 is hereby repealed. savings.

[PAGE 14]
14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—Sec. 1]
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any
action taken under the Enemy Property Act, 1968 as amended 34 of 1968.
by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of the said Act, as
amended by this Ordinance.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE,
President.
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
RAM Digitally signed
by RAM DAYAL
DAYAL Date: 2016.08.28
20:13:37 +05'30'
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI,
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI—2016.
GMGIPMRND—2520GI(CRC)—28-8-2016.