[PAGE 1]
1:i16• Ho, 14014/01120191C "
GovernmeLtli: of india
ministry of Home Affairs

New Dlhi dated
March 2019
ORDER
:..:;,; ,q,?c;::,- P ir C) C C:'.:' CI ure for 'imple4Tiental:c2idn
(Preveniion) Act, 1967. .)ection 51A of the Unlawful Activi

The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, '1967 (UAPA) was amended and notified on
11.12.2008, which, inter-alia, inserted Section 51A to the Act. Section 51A reads as unci
"..S7/:L For
the prevention of; and
(1-:;over77ment shall have power to — for coping with terrorist activitie•s. thi? C.:9ntrai
(a)
freeze, seize or attach hinds and other financial assets or economic resources
‘.1.-,;;;!.,1)helde (Julieby, on behalf of or at the direction of the individuals or entities Listed in
ienori,s-m: to the Order, or any other person engaged it? or suspected to be engag the
ed in ( h)
prohibit any individual or entity from making any funds, financial assets or
ocoriomic,,,.`ities Listedresourcesin theorSchedulerelated services available for the benefit of the individuals cr to
suspected to be engaged in terrorism. the Order or any other person engaged in or
('0
S'Ciiedliieprevent the entry into or the transit through India of individuals Listed
terrorism". to the Order or any other person engaged in or suspected to be engaged/17 1176.'in

Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967 defines "Order" as under:-
"Qiiiei." /neaps the PreventiOn and S
1-7 0 S 0)'116 0 / 7 S.) uppression of Te ITO riS 177 (11)7,9,1,9 117 Order, 2007 as may be amended from time to time. 4,? 1? 1'' 11 017 or
hl orcic-.?:i• to
;(;i-(2! one expeditiously and effectively implement the provisions of Section 51/3,„9
outlined vide this Ministry Order No. 17015/10/2002-IS-VI dated 27.08.2009.
LIHH \Aii: !I .,`,clivitic:)sjarli7ation of the Divisions in Ministry of Home Affairs, the
(Prevention) Act, 1967 and the work relating to countering ofadministrationterror financingof allocated to the CTCR Division. The order dated
27.8.2009 is accordingly rnoclit'iPcl
airicl c_;orTriii-nunicaiTion of details of IliWA NoeJail Officers;
E-:.ci<mcis :-
Ippointrnerit and communication of details; of UAPA Nodal Officers-
(i)
The UAPA Nodal Officer for CICR
i\firii; Ln.1 DiViSiCill kil/OLiid
be the „Joint SE:,,Cretary of Home Affairs. His contact details are Ott 23Q92736(Tel), 011-23092569r;C:,71211, ) i,':::.L6 at ici jscircr-rnha@gov.in (c.,?-rnail id).
01) TI-K-: Ministry of External Affairs, Department di Economic Affairs Foreigners
r.')Ivision of MHA, FI(J-IND; and RR SEB/, RDA (hereii-lafter referred to as Regulators)
ti-]:-:4-1-AlC.It.: •::;ppoirt a UAPA Nodal Officer and comiminica.te the name and contact details to R Division in MHA.

[PAGE 2]
(iii)
The States and UTs should appoint a UAPA Nodal Officer preferably of the rank of
the Principal SecretaWSecretary, Home Department and communicate the name and
contact details to the CTCR Division in MHA.
(iv)
The CTCR Division in MHA would maintain the consolidated list of all UAPA Nodal
Officers and forward the list to ail other UAPA Nodal Officers.
(v) The RBI, SEBI, IRDA should forward the consolidated list of UAPA Nodal Officers
to the banks, stock exchanges/depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI and
insurance companies respectively.
(vi)
The consolidated list of the UAPA Nodal Officers should be circulated by the
Nodal Officer of CTCR Division of MHA in July every year and on every change.
Joint Secretary (CTCR) being the Nodal Officer of CTCR Division of MHA, shall
cause the amended list of UAPA Nodal Officers to be circulated to the Nodal
Officers of Ministry of External Affairs, Department of Economic Affairs Foreigners
Division of IVIHA, RBI, SEBI, IRDA and F1U-IND.
,e,:e:,;i -eahAaicertion of the list of designated individuals/entities

A.;: regards communication of the list of designated individuals/entities-
(i)
The Ministry of External Affairs shall update the list of individuals and entities
subject to UN sanction measures on a regular basis. On any revision, the Ministry
of External Affairs would electronically forward this list to the Nodal Officers in
Regulators, FIU-IND, CTCR Division and Foreigners Division in MHA,
(ii) The Regulators would forward the list mentioned in (i) above (referred to as
designated lists) to the banks, stock exchanges/ depositories, intermediaries regulated
by SEBI and insurance companies respectively.
(iii) .[he CTCR Division of IVIHA would forward the designated lists to the UAPA Nodal Officer of all States and UTs.

(iv)
The Foreigners Division of IVIHA would forward the designated lists to the
immigration authorities and security agencies,

funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services ti-se
form of bank accounts, stocks or Insurance policies etc.
d. rega;-ds funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services held
Re loss of bank accounts, stocks or insurance policies etc., the Regulators would forward
th.e designated lists to the banks, stock exchanges/depositories, intermediaries regulated by
and insurance companies respectively. The RBI, SEBI and IRDA would issue necessary
to banks, stock exchanges/depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI and
nee companies requiring them to-

Maintain updated designated lists in electronic form and run a check on the given
parimeters on a regular basis to verify whether individuals or entities listed in the
:•:(ei-it.-7Jclule to the Order, herein after, referred to as designated individuals/entities are
holding any funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services held in
the form of bank accounts, stocks or Insurance policies etc., with them.
(ii)
In case, the particulars of any of their customers match with the particulars of
designated individuals/entities, the banks, stock exchanges/depositories, intermediaries
regulated by SEBI and insurance companies shall immediately not later than 24 hours
itolr the time of finding out SUCh customer, inform full particulars of the funds, financial

[PAGE 3]
assets or economic resources or related services held in the form of bank accounts,
stocks or Insurance policies etc., held by such customer on their books to the Joint
SPcretary (CTCR), Ministry of Home Affairs, at Fax No.011-23092569 and also convey over telephone on 011-23092736. The particulars apart from being sent by post, should
necessarily be conveyed on e-mail id: isctcr-mha(d)gov.in.
(iii)
The banks, stock exchanges/depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI and
insurance companies shall also send a copy of the communication mentioned in (if)
above to the UAPA Nodal Officer of the State/UT where the account is held and
Regulators and FiU-IND, as the case may be.
(iv)
In case, the match of any of the customers with the particulars of designated
individuals/entities is beyond doubt, the banks, stock exchanges/depositories,
intermediaries regulated by SEBI and insurance companies would prevent designated
persons from conducting financial transactions, under intimation to the Joint Secretary
(CTCR), Ministry of Home Affairs, at Fax telephone on 1\10.011-23092569 and also convey over 011-23092736. The particulars apart from being sent by post should
necessarily be conveyed on e-mail id: jj-sctor-mha(c-Poov.in.
(v)
The banks, stock exchanges /depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI and
insurance companies, shall file a Suspicious Transaction Report (STR) with FIU-IND
covering. all transactions in the accounts covered by paragraph. (if) above, carried
Through or attempted as per the prescribed format.

::).
On receipt of the particulars referred to in paragraph
i \ ,'i:S i On Of 4(ii) -above, CTC17 K/1HA would cause a verification to be conducted by the State Police and/or the
CentrA Agencies so as to ensure that the individuals / entities identified by the banks, stock
exchanges/depositories, intermediaries regulated by SEBI and insurance Companies are the
ones listed as designated individuals/entities and the funds, financial assets
Or economic resources or related services, reported by banks, stock exchanges/depositories,
intermediaries regulated by SEB1 and insurance companies are held by the designated
individuals/entities. This verification would be -completed within a period not exceeding 5 worfri,ig days from the date of receipt of such particulars.
(
in case, the results of the verification indicate that the Properties are
owned by or are held for the benefit of the designated individuals/entities, an order to freeze
Cthese- ;.-,:issei:s under Section 51A of the UAPA would be issued by the UAPA Nodal Officer of
Ilek Division of MHA and conveyed electronically to the concerned bank branch, depository,
branchI ..1,-? of uApAinsurance company branch under intimation to respective Regulators and FIU-IND Nodal Officer of si-- CTCR Division of )ai al.,o forward a copy thereof to all the Principal Secretary/Secretary, Home DepartmentMBA,
cJi ihe Slates or UTs, so that any individual or entity may be prohibited from making any
funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services available for the benefit of
..i-le de.::signated individuals/ entities or any other person engaged in or suspected to be
et k._.e.ged in terrorism. The UAPA Nodal Officer of CTOR Division of MHA shall also forward a
,,pv of ishe order to all Directors General of Police/ Commissioners of Police of all States/LITs
r initiNng action under the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1957.
oe,
order shall be issued without prior notice to the designated individual/ent;ty.

'ii: anciall assets or economic resources of the nature of immovaN,,,,,,

die U.,,PA NodalDivisionOfficer ofof MHAall would electronically forward the designated lists to
States and UTs with the request to have the names of the
individuals/entities, on the given parameters, verified from the records of the office

Lm)

[PAGE 4]
of the Registrar performing the work of registration of immovable properties in their respective iurdiction

in case, the designated individuals/entities are holding financial assets or
2e-own-lie resources of the nature of immovable property and if any match vvith the designated
indmduals/entities is found, the tJARA. Nodal Officer of the State/L [ would cause
corntntinication of the complete particulars of such individual/entity along with complete
details of the financial assets or economic resources of the nature of immovable property to
aconl: :Secretary (CTCR), Ministry of Home Affairs, immediately within 24 hours at Fax No.011-
23097569 and also convey over telephone on 011-23092736. The particulars apart from being sent by post would necessarily be conveyed on e-mail id isctcramha@gov.in
.
The UAPA Nodal Officer of the State/UT may cause such inquiry to be
(..i:onducteci by the State Police so as to ensure that the particulars sent by the Registrar
performing the work of registering immovable properties are indeed of these designated
individuals/entities. This verification would be completed within a maximum of 5 working days w,-
Id should be conveyed within 24 hours .of the verification, if it matches with the particulars of
The t:it.signated individual/entity to Joint Secretary (CTCR) Ministry of Home Affairs at the Fax,.
Lelephone numbers and also on the e-mail id given below.
la
A copy of this reference should be sent to Joint Secretary (CTCR), Ministry of
Horne Affairs, at Fax No.011-23092569 and also conveyed over telephone on 01123092736 lbs . particulars apart from being sent by post would necessarily be conveyed on e-mail id:
11/1HA may also have the verification conducted by the Central Agencies.
This verification would be completed within a maximum of 5 working days
I
in case, the results of the verification indicate that the particulars match
.with Those of designated individuals/entities, an order under section 51A of the UAPA would be
i3sLieci by the UAPA Nodal Officer of CTCR Division of MHA and conveyed to the concerned
Re.?gistrar performing the work of registering immovable properties and to FIU-IND under
intimation to the concerned UAPA Nodal Officer of the State/UT.

The order shall be issued without prior notice to the designated individuai/entity.
e
Further, the UAPA Nodal Officer of the State/UT shall cause to monitor the
.,cccounts of the designated individual/entity so as to prohibit any individual or
orn making any funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services
tor The benefit of the individuals or entities Listed in the Schedule to the Order or any
poison engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism. The UAPA Nodal Officer of
tna .51;74e/niT shall upon coming to his rnotice, transactions and attempts by third party
ityme(.iTiiely bring to the notice of the DGP/Commissioner of Police of the State/UT for also
initialing action under the provisions of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967.
sc m: Honor ij 0 in
of requests received from foreign countries under U. Security Councit 1373 of 2001

lb.
Security Council Resolution 1373 obligates countries to freeze
without delay the funds or other assets of persons who commit, or attempt to commit, terrorist
participate in or facilitate the commission of terrorist acts; of entities owned or
ifniTolled directly or indirectly by such persons; and of persons and entities acting on behalf
o: ci the direction of such persons and entities, including funds or other assets derived or
generated from property owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by such persons and
astociatti persons and entities. Each individual country has the authority to designate the
c sonic Sod entities that should have their funds or other assets frozen. Additionally, to ensure
that effs.::?ctive cooperation is developed among countries, countries should examine and givePThcI
to, if appropriate the actions initiated under the freezing mechanisms of other countries.

[PAGE 5]
14. To give effect to the requests of foreign countries under U.N. Security
Council Resolution 1373, the Ministry of External Affairs shall examine the requests made by
the foreign countries and forward it electronically, with their comments to the UAPA Nodal
)fficer for CIOR Division for freezing of funds or other assets.

U. The UAPA Nodal Officer of 01CR Division of MHA, shall cause the request to
examined, within 5 working days, so as to satisfy itself that on the basis of applicable legal
the requested designation is supported by reasonable grounds, or a reasonable
basis, to suspect or believe that the proposed designee is a terrorist, one who finances
terrcri-,-.;rn or a terrorist organization, and upon his satisfaction, request would be electronically
forwarded to the Nodal Officers in Regulators, FIU-IND and to the Nodal Officers of the
The proposed designee, as mentioned above would be treated as designated individuals/entities.

16. Upon receipt of the requests by these Nodal Officers from the UAPA nodal
offic.:.:er of CTCR Division, the procedure as enumerated at paragraphs 4 to 12 above shall be followed.

involved.The freezing orders shall be issued without prior notice to the designated persons

/or unfreezing of funds, financiai assets or economic resourtes or related
of individuals/entities inadvertently affected by the freezing mechanism upon Utfki
Of the person or entity is not a designated person

/-\ny individual or entity, if it has evidence to prove that the freezing of
funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services, owned/held by them has
ILr1 inadvertently frozen, they shall move an application giving the requisite evidence, in
writing, to the concerned bank, stock exchanges! depositories intermediaries regulated by
ins trance companies, Registrar of Immovable Properties and the State/UT Nodal

The banks, stock exchanges/depositories, intermediaries maculated ii- - by
suranc€: companies, Registrar of immovable Properties and the State/ UT Nod,,A i s shall inform and forward a copy of the application together with full details of the asset
..0 given by any individual or entity informing of the funds, financial assets or economic iieies or related services have been frozen inadvertently, to the Nodal Officer of CTCR
ot MHA a per the contact details given in paragraph 4 (ii) above j;-.1;e•.;. within two workinp
Tt-ie Joint ,_:.-',ecretary (CTOR), MHA being the UAPA Nodal Officer for CTC:4':Z Division of
cause such verification as may be required on the basis of the evidence furnished
individual/entity and, if satisfied, he shall pass an order, within 15 working days,
150 7, the funds, 'financial assets or economic resources or related services, owned/held
1;- 4-.)plicant, under intimation to the concerned bank, stock exchanges/ciepositories.:,iit::-
JTHEr_liariir's regulated by 3E81, insurance company and the Nodal Officers of States/UT5. if' is
Liot possible for any reason to pass an Order unfreezing the assets, within 15
kinq clays, the UAPA Nodal Officer of OTOR Division shall inform the applicant,

of Orders under section 51A of MaliAfful Activities (Prevention)

Orders under section 51A of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
i-o funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services would be

[PAGE 6]
communicated to all the banks, depositories/stock exchanges intermediaries regulated by
SEBI, insurance companies through respective Regulators, and to all Registrars performing
ime work of registering immovable properties, through the State/UT Nodal Officer by ..Tivhs,ion of MHA.
CTCP.

prevention of entry into or transit through India
.21.
As regards prevention of entry into or transit through India of the designated individuals,
the Foreigners Division of MHA, shall fonivard the designated lists to the immigration
nuthorities and security agencies with a request to prevent the entry into or the transit through
India The order shall take place without prior notice to the designated individuals/entities.

1,:on-2'2. The immigration authorities shall • ensure strict compliance of the Orders and also
iniunicate the details of entry or transit through India of the designated individuals as
prevented by them to the Foreigners Division of MHA.

inToo,..sdure for Communication of compliance of action taken under section 51A

The Nodal Officers of CTCR Division and Foreigners Division of MHA shall furnish the
i of funds, financial assets or economic resources or related services of designated
ngivicivals/entities frozen by an order, and details of the individuals whose entry into India or
transi". through India was prevented, respectively, to the Ministry of External Affairs for onward c:ornintinication to the United Nations.

Ail concerned are requested to ensure strict compliance of this order.

. ; • , ,
(Piyush Goval Joint Secretary to the Govergiment of India

Reserve Bank of India Mumbai
Cni:tirman Securities & Exchange Board of India, Mumbai
Chairmr,m, Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Hyderabad.
, Secretary, 'Ministry of External Affairs, New Delhi.
U. Finance Secretary, Ministry of Finance, New Delhi.
E.venue Secretary, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, New Delhi. Director, Intelligence Bureau, New Delhi.
,?:',dditiorlai Secretary, Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance, New Delhi.
Chief Secretaries of all States/Union Territories
Principal Secretary (Home)/Secretary (Home) of all States/ Union Territories
Directors General of Police of all States & Union Territories
Director General of Police, National Investigation Agency. New Delhi. C.::ommi:..7.;sioner of Police, Delhi.
„Iola':
Secretary (Foreigners), Ministry of Home Affairs, New Dlhi.
joicii: :Secretary (Capital Markets), Department of Economic Affairs Ministry of Finance, New Delhi.

Joint Secretary (Reven(ie), Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, New Delhi. Director (FIU-IND), New Delhi.

[PAGE 7]
EFA\ o.14014,0-020t9/CFT
Government of India
'Ministry of Home affairs
CTCR Division/CFI Cell)

North Block, New Delhi
Dated, the March, 2019
,
The Principal.. Secretary (Home)
All States/UTs

Procedure for implementation of Section-51A of the Unlawful Activities (ntion) Act, 1967.

Please refer to this Ministry's letter No. 17011/35/2009-IS-VI dated 22.02.2010
(copy enclosed) on the above mentioned subject. Ministry of Home Affairs has issued
iised order (copy enclosed) regarding the procedure for implementation of
.3,E:c'Liori 51A of the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967. The particulars of the
individuals/entities may now be sent to joint Secretary (CTCR), Ministry of
Hon-ie Ailairs at Fax No. 011-23092569 and also conveyed over telephone on
0 -Li -23092736. The particulars, apart from being sent by post, should necessarily be
:ived on email id: jscter-rnha©gov.in

7.ricl:-As above

(Piyush Goyal)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

[PAGE 8]
F. i\ioal 7011/35/2009-IS, VI
Government of India
iVlinistry of Home Affairs
(IS-I Division)

Dated: the k2February, 2010.

The Principal Secretary (Home)
Ali Staes/UM

- -Duojec-c- Procedure_sijait3f t lementation of Section 51A of the Unlawful
Activities Prevention Act5 1967.

As you may recall that the Ministry of Home Affairs had issued and order of e (-lumber dated 27th August, 2009 on the above mentioned subject. In this
context it is requested that the dealers of precious matter and precious stones may
t,6= L'-dviseci that if any designated individual or entity approaches them for sale or
puichase of precious metals and/or preCious stones or attempts to undertake such
t-a-gsactions the dealer should not carry out such transaction and immediately
i -brrn the Principal Secretary (Home), who shall in turn follow the procedure laid
paragraphs 7 to 10 of the above mentioned Order.

rnilarly, the Registrar of Societies/Firms/non-profit organisations should be
that if any designated individual/entity is a shareholder/Member/partner
didfracto:',ettieritrusteeibeneficiarylbeneficial owner of any society/partnership •)i'L-criArustitriorn-profit
organization, then the Registrar should immediately inform the
Secretary (Home), who shall in turn follow the procedure laid down in
graphs 7 to 10 of the above mentioned Order. The Registrar should- also be
ec that no societies/firms/non-profit organisations should be allowed to be
-€. ,.•-istar,aol, if any of the designated individual/entity is a Director/partner/office
;aLreritrustee/settieribeneficiary or beneficial owner of such juridical person and in caL6 sudi
request is feceived, then the. Registrar should immediately inform the
P:Mcipa Secretary (Home), who shall in turn follow the procedure laid down in
7 to 10 of the above mentioned Order.

The list of the designated entities/individuals is enclosed with the request
hiavane s-arne circulated to all dealers of precious metals and/or precious stones, the ,:;ornmercialisales tax department.
E-t.:poi: As above.

Y urs faithfully,
A

(D. Diptivilasa)
joint Secretary to the Government of India

[PAGE 9]
F.No.14014/01/2019/CFT
Government of India
Ministry of Home affairs
CTCR Division/CFT Cell)

North Block, New Delhi
Dated, the (I March, 2019

The Chief Secretary
Government of Goa,

PTocedure for implementation of Section-51A of the Unlawful Activities
Act, 1967.

"'le-eise refer to this Ministry's letter No. 17011/35/2009-IS-VI dated 22.02.2010
(a)p' enclosed) on the above mentioned subject. Ministry of Home Affairs has issued
rGvis,_-,q.:1 order (copy enclosed) regarding the procedure for implementation of
51A of the Unlavvful Activities Prevention Act, 1967. The particulars of the
individuals/entities may now be sent to Joint Secretary (CTCR), Ministry of
AfLlirs at Fax No. 011-23092569 and also conveyed over telephone on
- -.:2_a_02736. The particulars, apart from being sent by post, should necessarily be
ved on email id: jsctcr-mha©gov.in

above ,...1
(Piyush Goyal)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

wL9

[PAGE 10]
F. No.1701113512009-1S-1/1
Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs
(IS-/ Division)

Dated, the.UFebruary, 2010.

The Chief Secretary
Government of Goa,
Panji

Subject:- Procedure for implementation of Section 51A of the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.

As you may recall that the Ministry of Home Affairs had issued ad order of
eVall number dated 27th August, 2009 on the above Mentioned subject. In this contaxt it is requested that the appropriate department of the State Government of
Goa, administering the operations relating to Casinos, may be advised to ensure
the designated individuals/entities should not, be allowed to own or have
Derdeficial ownership in any Casino operation. Further any designated
'J;.;/entity visits or participates in any game in the Casino and/or if any assets
DC such designate.d individual/entity is with the Casino operator, and if the
pardc-Giars of any client matches with the particulars of designated
individualSientities, the Casino shall immediately, not later than 24 hours from the
pi ming put such client, inform full particulars to the Saint (Secretary-0,
ofom Affairs:at_FaxNo. 011-23092569 and also convey over telephone
The particulars apart from being sent by post should• r cossarbe cUriveyed,:on e-mail id: jsis(nic.in.
. I
ssignated:entities/indiViduals is enclosed.

u7( Yours faithfully,

(0.
Joint Secretary tp the Government of India
Tel. 23092736

[PAGE 11]
F.I4o.1 4014/01/2019/CFT
Government of India
Ministry of Home affairs
CTCR Division/CFT Cell)

North Block, New Delhi
Dated, the )L March, 2019

Office Memorandum

'Procedure for Implementation of Section-51A of the Unlawful Activities
v•vro.dort) Act, 1967.

of Corporate Affairs may refer to the Ministry of Home Affairs letter No.
17011/35/2009-iS-VI dated 22.02.2010 (copy enclosed) on the above mentioned
iviinistry of Home Affairs has issued a revised order (copy enclosed)
rgairclina the procedure for implementation of Section 51A of the Unlawful Activities
ntion Act, 1967. The particulars of the designated individuals/entities may now
to Joint Secretary (CTCR), Ministry of Home Affairs at Fax No. 011-23092569
corivE.,)yed over telephone on 011-23092736. The particulars, apart from
nt by post, should necessarily be conveyed on email id: jsctcr-mha@gov.in

(Piyush Goyal)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

S€:Jcretary
Ministry of Corporate Affairs
Shstri Bhawan, New Delhi.

QL)

[PAGE 12]
F. No.17011/35/2009-IS.V1
Government of India
Ministry of Home Affairs
(IS-I Diviiion)

Dated, theFebruary, 2010.

Office Memorandum

Subject:- Procedure for implementation of Section 51A of the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967..

The undersigned is directed to recall the provisions of the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act (UAPA) which were amended and notified on 31.12.2008, which
inter-alia, amended and inserted provisions to specifically combat financing of
terrorism. Section 51A was inserted in the Act, which reads as under:-

"51A. For the prevention of, and for coping with terrorist activities, the
Central Government shall have power to —

(a) freeze, seize or attach funds and other financial assets or economic
resources held by, on behalf of or at the direction of the individuals or
entities Listed in the Schedule to the Order, or any other person engaged in
or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;

(b) prohibit any individual or entity from making any funds, financial
assets or economic resources or related services available for the benefit of
the individuals or entities .Listed in the Schedule to the Order or any other
person engaged in or suspected to be engaged in terrorism;

(c) prevent the entry into or the transit through India of individuals Listed
in the Schedule to the Order or any other pelson engaged in or suspected
to be engaged in terrorism".

The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act defines "Order" as under:-

"Order" means the Prevention and Suppression of Terrorism
(Implementation of Security Council Resolutions) Order, 2007, as may be
amended from time to time.

2. A copy of the. Prevention and Suppression of Terrorism (Implementation of
Security Council Resolutions) Order dated 8th July, 2009 containing the list of
designated individuals and entities is enclosed.

[PAGE 13]
-2-
,
In order to expeditiously and effectively implement the provisions of Section th August, 2009 to3.51A, the Ministry of Home Affairs has issued an Order dated 27
the regulators of the financial sectors, and to all the State Governments and UT.
Ad Ministrations, with regards to immovable property. A copy of the Order is
enclosed.
In order to effectively combat financing of terrorism, it is requested that the,of . _ ,.. _
4.Ministry of Corporate Affairs issues an appropriate order to the Institute
Chartered Accountants of India, Institute of Cost and Works Acoountants of India
and Institute of Company Secretaries of India requesting them to sensitize -their
respective members to the provisions of Section 51A of UAPA, so that any
designated individual or entity, which may approach them for entering/investing in
the financial sector and/or immovable property, the member shall convey the
complete details of such designated individual/entity, as per the procedure
mentioned in para 10 below.
It is further requested that the members of these institutes should also be
5.sensitized that in case they are holding or managing any assets/resources of hould immediately convey the
Designated individuals/entities, then such member /esntity,. as per the procedure
complete details of such designated individual
mentioned in para 10 below.
The members of these Institutes should also be sensitized that if they have
6.arranged for incorporation, formation/registration of any company, limited liability
firm, society, trust, and association where any of Designated individual/entity is a
Director, Shareholder/member of company/society/ association or partner in a firm
or settler/trustee or beneficiary of trust or beneficial owner of such juridical person
in such cases the member of the institute should convey the complete details of
such' designated individual/entity, as per the procedure mentioned in para 10
below.
The members of these Institutes should further be sensitized that if any member for incorporation, 7. of its designated individual/entity approaches any firm, partnership firm, company, limited liability
formation/registration of any society, trust, association where any of designated individual/entity is a Director,
Shareholder/member of a Company/society/association or partner in a firm or
- settler/trustee/beneficiary of a trust/beneficial owner of a juridical person, in such institute should not incorporate/form/register such
cases the member of the in juridical person - and should coney the complete details of such designated
individual/entity, as per the procedure mentioned in para 10 below.
In addition, the members of ICSI be sensitized that if their Secretary or
8.holding any managerial position where any of designated individual/entity is a
Shareholder or having beneficial ownership in any such juridical
Director an person then the member should convey the complete details of such designated
individual/entity, as per the procedure mentioned in para 10 below.

[PAGE 14]
-3-

Further the Registrar of Companies (ROC) may be advised that in case any
9.
.designated individual/entity is a shareholder /director/whole time director in any company registered with ROC or beneficial owner of such company, then the ROC
the complete details of such designated individual/entity, as per the
should convey procedure mentioned in para 10 below. This procedure also to be followed in case Partnership
of any designated individual/entity being a partner of limited liabilities
firms registered with ROC or beneficial owner of such firms. Further the ROC may
company or limited liability Partnership firm shall be allowed to
be advised that individual/entity ° is the designated be registered is . any of the Director/Promoter/Partner or beneficial owner of such companY or firm and in case
such a request received the ROC shall follow the procedure as laid down in pars
10 below.
In case, the particulars of any of their client match with the particulars of 10. designated individuals/entities, the members shall immediately, not later than 24 full particulars to the Joint inform hours from the time of finding out such client, at Fax No.011-23092569 and also Secretary (ISA), Ministry of Home Affairs,
convey over telephone on 011-23092736. The particulars apart from being sent by
post should necessarily be conveyed on e-mail id: j§j§@ric,11.

End: As above. efk-
(D. Diptivilasa)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India

To,
The Secretary, •
Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi.

trt