[PAGE 1]
Annex-I
The Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969
(Act No. 18 of 1969)
[31st May 1969]

An Act to provide for the regulation of registration of births and deaths
and for matters connected therewith.

Be it enacted by Parliament in the Twentieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:

CHAPTER I (f) “State Government”, in relation to a
PRELIMINARY Union territory, means the
Administrator thereof;
1. Short title, extent and
commencement—(1) This Act may be (g) “still-birth” means foetal death where a
called the Registration of Births and Deaths product of conception has attained at
Act, 1969. least the prescribed period of
gestation.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law
(3) It shall come into force in a State on which is not in force in any area shall, in
such date as the Central Government may, relation to that area, be construed as a
by notification in the Official Gazette, reference to the corresponding law, if any, in
appoint : force in that area.

Provided that different dates may be
appointed for difference parts of a State. CHAPTER II

REGISTRATION ESTABLISHMENT2. Definitions and interpretation—
(1) In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires, 3. Registrar General, India—(1) The
Central Government may, by notification in
(a) “birth” means live-birth or still-birth ; the Official Gazette, appoint a person to be
known as the Registrar-General, India.
(b) “death” means the permanent
disappearance of all evidence of life (2) The Central Government may also
at any time after live-birth has taken appoint such other officers with such
place ; designations as it thinks fit for the purpose
of discharging, under the superintendence
(c) “foetal death” means absence of all and direction of the Registrar-General, such
evidence of life prior to the complete functions of the Registrar-General under this
expulsion or extraction from its mother Act as he may, from time to time, authorize
of a product of conception irrespective them to discharge.
of the duration of pregnancy ;
(3) The Registrar-General may issue
(d) “live-birth” means the complete general directions regarding registration of
expulsion of extraction from its mother births and deaths in the territories to which
of a product of conception, irrespective this Act extends, and shall take steps to coof the duration of pregnancy, which, ordinate and unify the activities of Chief
after such expulsion or extraction, Registrars in the matter of registration of
breathes or shows any other evidence births and deaths and submit to the Central
of life, and each product of such birth is Government an annual report on the
considered live-born ; working of this Act in the said territories.

(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules 4. Chief Registrar—(1) The State
made under this Act; Government may, by notification in the

[PAGE 2]
Official Gazette, appoint a Chief Registrar the jurisdiction of a municipality, Panchayat
for the State. or other local authority or any other area or
a combination of any two or more of them :
(2) The State Government may also
appoint such other officers with such Provided that the State Government
designations as it thinks fit for the purpose may appoint in the case of a municipality,
of discharging, under the superintendence Panchayat or other local authority, any
and direction of the Chief Registrar, such of officer or other employee thereof as a
his functions as he may, from time to time, Registrar.
authorize them to discharge.
(2) Every Registrar shall, without fee or
(3) The Chief Registrar shall be the reward, enter in the register maintained for
chief executive authority in the State for the purpose all information given to him
carrying into execution the provisions of this under section 8 or section 9 and shall also
Act and the rules and orders made take steps to inform himself carefully of
thereunder subject to the directions, if any, every birth and of every death which takes
given by the State Government. place in his jurisdiction and to ascertain and
register the particulars required to be
(4) The Chief Registrar shall take steps registered.
by the issue of suitable instructions or
otherwise, to co-ordinate, unify and (3) Every Registrar shall have an office
supervise the work of registration in the in the local area for which he is appointed.
State for securing an efficient system of
registration and shall prepare and submit to (4) Every Registrar shall attend his
the State Government, in such manner and office for the purpose of registering births
at such intervals as may be prescribed, a and deaths on such days and at such hours
report on the working of this Act in the State as the Chief Registrar may direct and shall
alongwith the statistical report referred to in cause to be placed in some conspicuous
sub-section (2) of section 19. place on or near the outer door of the office
of the Registrar a board bearing, in the local
5. Registration divisions—The State language, his name with the addition of
Government may, by notification in the Registrar of Births and Deaths for the local
Official Gazette, divide the territory within area for which he is appointed, and the days
the State into such registration divisions as and hours of his attendance.
it may think fit and prescribe different rules
for different registration divisions. (5) The Registrar may, with the prior
approval of the Chief Registrar, appoint
6. District Registrar—(1) The State Sub-Registrars and assign to them any or
Government may appoint a District all of his powers and duties in relation to
Registrar for each revenue district and such specified areas within his jurisdiction.
number of Additional District Registrars as it
thinks fit who shall, subject to the general
control and direction of the District CHAPTER III
Registrar, discharge such functions of the
REGISTRATION OF BIRTHS ANDdistrict Registrar as the District Registrar
DEATHSmay, from time to time, authorize them to
discharge.
8. Persons required to register
births and deaths—(1) It shall be the duty (2) The District Registrar shall
of the persons specified below to give orsuperintend, subject to the direction of the
cause to be given, either orally or in writing,Chief Registrar, the Registration of births
according to the best of their knowledge andand deaths in the district and shall be
belief, within such time as may beresponsible for carrying into execution in the
prescribed, information to the Registrar ofdistrict the provisions of this Act and the
the several particulars required to beorders of the Chief Registrar issue d from
entered in the forms prescribed by the Statetime to time for the purpose of this Act.
Government under sub-section (1) of
section 16,-- 7. Registrars—(1) The State
(a) in respect of births and deaths in aGovernment may appoint a Registrar for
house, whether residential or non-each local area comprising the area within
residential, not being any place

[PAGE 3]
referred to in clauses (b) to (e), the 9. Special provision regarding
head of the house or, in case more births and deaths in a plantation—In the
than one household live in the house, case of births and deaths in a plantation, the
the head of the household, the head superintendent of the plantation shall give or
being the person, who is so cause to be given to the Registrar the
recognized by the house or the information referred to in section 8:
household, and if he is not present in
the house at any time during the Provided that the persons referred to in
period within which the birth or death clauses (a) to (f) of sub-section (i) of section
has to be reported, the nearest 8 shall furnish the necessary particulars to
relative of the head present in the the superintendent of the plantation.
house, and in the absence of any
such person, the oldest adult male Explanation – In this section, the
person present therein during the said expression “plantation” means any land not
period; less than four hectares in extent which is
being prepared for the production of, or
(b) in respect of births and deaths in a actually produces, tea, coffee, pepper,
hospital, health center, maternity or rubber, cardamom, cinchona or such other
nursing home or other like institution, products as the State Government may, by
the medical officer in charge or any notification in the Official Gazette, specify
person authorized by him in this and the expression “superintendent of the
behalf; plantation” means the person having the
(c) in respect of births and deaths in a jail, charge or supervision of the labourers and
the jailor in charge ; work in the plantation whether called a
manager, superintendent or by any other
(d) in respect of births and deaths in a name.
choultry, chattram, hostel,
dharmasala, boarding house, lodging 10. Duty of certain persons to notify
house, tavern, barrack, toddy shop or births and deaths and to certify cause of
place of public resort, the person in death—(1) It shall be the duty of—
charge thereof ;
(e) in respect of any new-born child or (i) the midwife or any other medical or
dead body found deserted in a public health attendant at a birth or death,
place, the headman or other
corresponding officer of the village in (ii) the keeper or the owner of a place set
the case of a village and officer in apart for the disposal of dead bodies
charge of the local police station or any person required by a local
elsewhere : authority to be present at such place,
or
Provided that any person who finds
such child or dead body, or in whose (iii) any other person whom the State
charge such child or dead body may Government may specify in this
be placed, shall notify such fact to the behalf by his designation, to notify
headman or officer aforesaid ; every birth or death or both at which
(f) in any other place, such person as he or she attended or was present, or
may be prescribed. which occurred in such areas as may
be prescribed, to the Registrar within
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained such time and in such manner as may
in sub-section (1), the State Government, be prescribed.
having regard to the conditions obtaining in
a registration division, may be order require (2) In any area, the State
that for such period as may be specified in Government, having regard to the facilities
the order, any person specified by the State available therein in this behalf, may require
Government by designation in this behalf, that a certificate as to the cause of death
shall give or cause to be given information shall be obtained by the Registrar from such
regarding births and deaths in a house person and in such form as may be
referred to in clause (a) of sub-) section (1) prescribed.
instead of the persons specified in that
clause. (3) Where the State Government
has required under sub-section (2) that a

[PAGE 4]
certificate as to the cause of death shall be or a Presidency Magistrate after verifying
obtained, in the event of the death of any the correctness of the birth or death and on
person who, during his last illness was payment of the prescribed fee.
attended by a medical practitioner, the
medical practitioner shall, after the death of (4) The provisions of this section
that person, forthwith, issue without shall be without prejudice to any action that
charging any fee, to the person required may be taken against a person for failure on
under this Act to give information his part to register any birth or death within
concerning the death, a certificate in the the time specified therefore and any such
prescribed form stating to the best of his birth or death may be registered during the
knowledge and belief the cause of death; pendency of any such action.
and the certificate shall be received and
delivered by such person to the Registrar at 14. Registration of name of child.—
the time of giving information concerning the Where the birth of any child has been
death as required by this Act. registered without a name, the parent or
guardian of such child shall within the
11. Informant to sign the register prescribed period give information regarding
– Every person who has orally given to the the name of the child to the Registrar either
Registrar may information required under orally or in writing and thereupon the
this Act shall write in the register maintained Registrar shall enter such name in the
in this behalf, his name, description and register and initial and date of the entry.
place of abode, and, if he cannot write, shall
put his thumb mark in the register against 15. Correction or cancellation of
his name, description and place of abode, entry in the register of births and
the particulars being in such a case entered deaths.—If it is proved to the satisfaction of
by the Registrar. the Registrar that any entry of a birth or
death in any register kept by him under this
12. Extracts of registration Act is erroneous in form or substance, or
entries to be given to informant.—The has been fraudulently or improperly made,
Registrar shall, as soon as the registration he may, subject to such rules as may be
of a birth or death has been completed, made by the State Government with respect
give, free of charge, to the person who gives to the conditions on which and the
information under section 8 or section 9 an circumstances in which such entries may be
extract of the prescribed particulars under corrected or cancelled, correct the error or
his hand from the register relating to such cancel the entry by suitable entry in the
birth or death. margin, without any alteration of the original
entry, and shall sign the marginal entry and
13. Delayed registration of births add thereto the date of the correction or
and deaths. – (1) Any birth or death of cancellation.
which information is given to the Registrar
after the expiry of the period specified CHAPTER IV
therefore, but within thirty days of its
MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS AND
occurrence, shall be registered on payment
STATISTICS
of such late fee as may be prescribed.

(2) Any birth or death of which 16. Registrars to keep registers
delayed information is given to the Registrar in the prescribed form – (1) Every
after thirty days but within one year of its Registrar shall keep in the prescribed form a
occurrence shall be registered only with the register of births and deaths for the
written permission of the prescribed registration area or any part thereof in
authority and on payment of the prescribed relation to which he exercises jurisdiction.
fee and the production of an affidavit made
before a notary public or any other office (2) The Chief Registrar shall cause
authorized in this behalf by the State to be printed and supplied a sufficient
Government. number of register books for making entries
of births and deaths according to such forms
(3) Any birth or death which has not and instructions as may, from time to time,
been registered within one year of its be prescribed; and a copy of such forms in
occurrence, shall be registered only on an the local language shall be posted in some
order made by a magistrate of the first class

[PAGE 5]
conspicuous place on or near the outer door CHAPTER V
of the office of every Registrar.
MISCELLANEOUS

17. Search of births and deaths
20. Special provision as toregister—(1) Subject to any rules made in
registration of births and deaths ofthis behalf by the State Government,
citizens outside India—(1) The Registrarincluding rules relating to the payment of
General shall, subject to such rules as mayfees and postal charges, any person may-be made by the Central Government in this
behalf, cause to be registered information (a) cause a search to be made by
as to births and deaths of citizens of India the Registrar for any entry in a
outside India received by him under the register of births and deaths;
rules relating to the registration of such and
citizens at Indian Consulates made under
the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955), and (b) obtain an extract from such
every such registration shall also be register relating to any birth or
deemed to have been duly made under this death :
Act.
Provided that no extract relating to
(2) In the case of any child bornany death, issued to any person, shall
outside India in respect of whom informationdisclose the particulars regarding the cause
has not been received as provided in sub-of death as entered in the register.
section (1), if the parents of the child returns
to India with a view to settling therein, they (2) All extracts given under this
may, at any time within sixty days from thesection shall be certified by the Registrar or
date of the arrival of the child in India, getany other officer authorised by the State
the birth of the child registered under thisGovernment to give such extracts as
Act in the same manner as if the child wasprovided in section 76 of the Indian
born in India and the provisions of sectionEvidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), and shall be
13 shall apply to the birth of such child afteradmissible in evidence for the purpose of
the expiry of the period of sixty daysproving the birth or death to which the entry
aforesaid.relates.

21. Power of Registrar to obtain 18. Inspection of registration
information regarding birth or death—offices – The registration offices shall be
The Registrar may either orally or in writinginspected and the registers kept therein
require any person to furnish anyshall be examined in such manner and by
information within his knowledge insuch authority as may be specified by the
connection with a birth or death in theDistrict Registrar.
locality within which such person resides
and that person shall be bound to comply 19. Registrars to send periodical
with such requisition.returns to the Chief Registrar for
compilation—(1) Every Registrar shall
22. Power to give directions—Thesend to the Chief Registrar or to any officer
Central Government may give suchspecified by him, at such intervals and in
directions to any State Government as maysuch form as may be prescribed, a return
appear to be necessary for carrying intoregarding the entries of births and deaths in
execution in the State any of the provisionsthe register kept by such Registrar.
of this Act or of any rule or order made
thereunder. (2) The Chief Registrar shall cause
the information in the returns furnished by
23. Penalties—(1) Any personthe Registrars to be compiled and shall
publish for the information of the public a who—
statistical report on the registered births and
deaths during the year at such intervals and (a) fails without reasonable cause
in such form as may be prescribed. to give any information which it
is his duty to give under any of
the provisions of sections 8 and
9; or

[PAGE 6]
(b) gives or causes to be given, for and no further proceedings shall be taken
the purpose of being inserted in against him in respect of such offence.
any register of births and
deaths, any information which 25. Sanction for prosecution—No
he knows or believes to be false prosecution for an offence punishable under
regarding any of the particulars this Act shall be instituted except by an
required to be known and officer authorised by the Chief Registrar by
registered; or general or special order in this behalf.

(c) refuses to write his name, 26. Registrars and Subdescription and place of abode Registrars to be deemed public
or to put his thumb mark in the servants—All Registrars and Subregister as required by section Registrars shall, while acting or purporting
11, shall be punishable with fine to act in pursuance of the provisions of this
which may extend to fifty Act or any rule or order made thereunder be
rupees. deemed to be public servants within the
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
(2) Any Registrar or Sub-Registrar Code (45 of 1860).
who neglects or refuses, without reasonable
cause, to register any birth or death 27. Delegation of powers—The
occuring in his jurisdiction or to submit any State Government may, by notification in the
returns as required by sub-section (1) of Official Gazette, direct that any power
section 19 shall be punishable with fine exercisable by it under this Act (except the
which may extend to fifty rupees. power to make rules under section 30) or
the rules made thereunder shall, subject to
(3) Any medical practitioner who such conditions, if any, as may be specified
neglects or refuses to issue a certificate in the direction be exercisable also by such
under sub-section (3) of section 10 and any officer or authority subordinate to the State
person who neglects or refuses to deliver Government as may be specified in the
such certificate shall be punishable with fine direction.
which may extend to fifty rupees.
28. Protection of action taken in
(4) Any person who, without good faith—(1) No suit, prosecution or
reasonable cause, contrvenes any provision other legal proceeding shall lie against the
of this Act for the contravention of which no Government, the Registrar General, any
penalty is provided for in this section shall Registrar, or any person exercising any
be punishable with fine which may extend to power or performing any duty under this Act
ten rupees. for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act
(5) Notwithstanding anything or any rule or order made thereunder.
contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898), an offence (2) No suit or other legal proceeding
under this section shall be tried summarily shall lie against the government for any
by a Magistrate. damage caused or likely to be caused by
anything which is in good faith done or
24. Power to compound offices— intended to be done in pursuance of this act
(1) Subject to such conditions as may be or any rule or order made thereunder.
prescribed, any officer authorised by the
Chief Registrar by a general or special order 29. Act not to be in derogation of
in this behalf may, either before or after the Act 6 of 1886—Nothing in this Act shall be
institution of criminal proceedings under this construed to be in derogation of the
Act, accept from the person who has provisions of the Births, Deaths and
committed or is reasonably suspected of Marriages Registration Act, 1886.
having committed an offence under this Act,
by way of composition of such offence a 30. Power to make rules—(1) The
sum of money not exceeding fifty rupees. State Government may with the approval of
the Central Government, by notification in
(2) On the payment of such sum of the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out
money, such person shall be discharged the purposes of this Act.

[PAGE 7]
(2) In particular, and without (l) the correction of errors and the
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing cancellation of entries in the
provision, such rules may provide for— register of births and deaths;

(a) the forms of registers of births and (m) any other matter which has to
deaths required to be kept under be, or may
this Act;
be, prescribed.
(b) the period within which and the
form and the manner in which 1[(3) Every rule made under this Act
information should be given to the shall be laid, as soon as may be
Registrar under section 8; after it is made, before the State
Legislature].
(c) the period within which and the
manner in which births and deaths 31. Repeal and saving—(1) Subject to the
shall be notified under sub-section provisions of section 29, as from the coming
(1) of section 10; into force of this Act in any State or part
thereof, so much of any law in force therein
(d) the person from whom and the as relates to the matters covered by this Act
form in which a certificate as to shall stand repealed in such State or part,
cause of death shall be as the case may be.
obtained;
(2) Notwithstanding such repeals,
(e) the particulars of which extract anything done or any action taken (including
may be given under section 12 any instruction or direction issued, any
regulation or rule or order made) under any
(f) the authority which may grant such law shall, in so far as such thing or
permission for registration of a action is not inconsistent with the provisions
birth or death under sub-section of this Act, be deemed to have been done or
(2) of section 13; taken under the provisions aforesaid, as if
they were in force when such thing was
(g) the fees payable for registration done or such action was taken, and shall
made under section 13; continue in force accordingly until
superseded by anything done or any action
(h) the submission of reports by the taken under this Act.
Chief Registrar under subsection (4) of section 4; 32. Power to remove difficulty—If
any difficulty arises in giving effect in a State
(i) the search of birth and death to the provisions of this Act in their
registers and the fees payable application to any areas, the State
for such search and for the Government may, with the approval of the
grant of extracts from the Central Government, by order make such
register; provisions or give such directions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
(j) the forms in which and the as appears to the State Government to be
intervals at which the returns and necessary or expedient for removing the
the statistical report under difficulty :
section 19 shall be furnished and
published; Provided that no order shall be
made under this section in relation to any
(k) the custody, production and area in a State after the expiration of two
transfer of the registers and years from the date on which this Act comes
other records kept by into force in that area.
Registrars;

1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, s.2 and Schedule (w.e.f.15.5.1986).