[PAGE 1]
| ; pai
‘ \
vie ie Se YeP—{H)04/0007/2003—16 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—16
VRa a: USA
FATA
EXTRAORDINARY
art IH— Bes 1 .
PART It — Section 1?
wihtrat @ wearfers
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
, No. 9] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, JANUARY 7, 2016/PAUSHA 17, 1937 (SAKA)
aera Bier Ge en dt thea fe ae ree SVT
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
, MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Dethi, the Ith January, 2016/Pausha 17, 1937 (Saka)
. THE ENEMY PROPERTY (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION)
ORDINANCE, 2016
No. 1 or 2016
Promulgated by the President in the Sixty-sixth Year of the
Republic of India.
An Ordinance further to amend the Enemy Property Act,
1968 and the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971.
WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the President is
satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary for
him to take immediate action;
Now, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause
. (1) of article 123 of the Constitution, the President is pleased to
promulgate the following Ordinance:—
1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Enemy Property Shorttitle and |
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016. commencement. |
(2) It shalt come into force at once.

[PAGE 2]
rr ———————————————————————— a,

. 2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Part fl—
Amendment 2. On and from the date of commencement of the Enemy
of section 2. Property Act, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), 34 of 1968.

in section 2,—
() in clause (6),—

(J) for the words “an enemy subject”, the words “an
enemy subject including his legal heir and successor
whether or not a citizen of India or the citizen of a
country which is not an enemy or the enemy, enemy
subject or his legal heir and successor who has changed
his nationality” shall be substituted and shall always be
deemed to have been substituted;

(J) for the words “an enemy firm”, the words “an
enemy firm, including its succeeding firm whether or not
partners or members of such succeeding firm are citizen
of India or the citizen of a country which is not an enemy
or such firm which has changed its nationality” shall be
substituted and shal! always be deemed to have been
substituted; ‘

(7D for the words “does not. include a citizen of
India”, the words “does not include a citizen of India
other than those citizens of India, being the legal heir and
successor of the “enemy” or “enemy subject” or “enemy
firm” ” shal) be substituted and shatl always be deemed
to have been substituted;

UY) the following &xplanations shall be inserted
and shall always be deemed to have been inserted at the
end, namely:—

‘Explanation I,—For the purposes of this

clause, the expression “does not include a citizen of

India” shall exclude and shall always be deemed to

have been excluded those citizens of India, who are

or have been the legal heir and successor of an

“enemy” or an “enemy subject” or an “enemy firm”

which or who has ceased to be an enemy due to

death, extinction, winding up of business or change

of nationality or that the legal heir and successor is a

citizen of India or the citizen of a country which is

not an enemy.

Explanation 2—Jeor the purposes of this
clause, it is hereby clarified that nothing contained
in this Act shall affect any right of the legal heir

|

[PAGE 3]
rs — ———EE——————————————— LL,
1 \
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
- nn See Se?
and successor referred to in this clause (not being
inconsistent to the provisions of this Act) which
have been conferred upon him under any law for
the time being in force.’;
Gi} in clausc (e), in the proviso,—
() after the words “dies in the territories to which

this Act extends”, the words “or dies in any territory

outside India” shall be inserted and shall always be

deemed to have been inserted;
(D the following Explanations shall be inserted

and shall always be deemed to have been inserted at

the end, namely:—

‘Explanation 1 — For the purposes of this clause, it is
hereby clarified that “enemy property” shall, ;
notwithstanding that the enemy or the enemy subject or
the enemy firm has ceased to be an enemy due to death,
extinction, winding up of business or change of
nationality or that the legal heir and successor is a citizen
of India or the citizen of a country which is not an enemy,
continue and always be deemed to be continued as an
enemy property.

Explanation 2.- For the purposes of this clause, the
expression “enemy property” shall mean and include and
shall be deemed to have always meant and included all
rights, titles and interest in, or any benefit arising out of,
such property.’.

3. On and from the date of commencement of the principal Amendment of
Act, in section 5, after sub-section (2), the following shall be Section 5.
inserted, and shall always be deemed to have been inserted,
namely:—

*(3) The enemy property vested in the Custodian shall,
notwithstanding that the enemy or the enemy subject or the
enemy firm has ceased to be an enemy due to death,
extinction, winding up of business or change of nationality or
that the legal heir and successor is a citizen of India or the
citizen of a country which is not an enemy, continue to
remain, save as otherwise provided in this Act, vested in the
Custodian.

Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,
“enemy property vested in the Custodian” shall include and
always deemed to have been included all rights, titles, and

[PAGE 4]
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY [Par I
interest in, or any benefit arising out of, such property vested in
him under this Act.’.

Insertion of 4. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following section
sa section shall be inserted, namely:—
Issue of “SA. The Custodian may, after making such inquiry as he
certificate by deems necessary, by order, declare that the property of the
Custodian. enemy or the enemy subject or the enemy firm described in
the order, vests in him under this Act and issue a certificate
to this effect and such certificate shall be the evidence of the
facts stated therein.”.
Insertion of 5. On and from the date of commencement of the principal
nee Act, after section 5A (as so inserted by section 4 of this
. Ordinance), the following shall be inserted and shall always be
deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
Law of “SB. Nothing contained in any law for the time being in
Succession force relating to succession Or any Custom or usage governing
custom or succession of property shall apply in relation to the enemy
usage not to property under this Act and no person (including his legal heir
apply to and successor) shall have any right and shall be deemed not to
enemy have any right (including all rights, titles and interests or any
property. benefit arising out of such property) in relation to such enemy
property.

Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the
expressions "custom" and "usage" signify any rule which, having
been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time, has
obtained the force of law in the matters of succession of
property.’.

Amendment 6. On and from the date of commencement of the principal

of section 6. Act, for section 6 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be substituted and shall always be deemed to have been

, substituted, namely:—

Prohibition “6, (1) No enemy or enemy subject or enemy firm shall

to transfer have any right and shall never be deemed to have any right to

Sir aaied transfer any property vested in the Custodian under this Act,

Custodian whether before or after the commencement of this Act and

by an any transfer of such property shall be void and shall always

enemy, be deemed to have been void.

enemy

subject or

enemy firm.

(2) Where any property vested in the Custodian under
this Act had been transferred, before the commencement of
the Enemy Property (Amendment and _ Validation)
Ordinance, 2016, by an enemy or enemy subject or enemy

|
|

[PAGE 5]
Sec. 1} THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
oounaoaoOoOoO0aoao0m0mummmmmeeee ee
firm and such transfer has been declared, by an order, made
by the Central Government, to be void, and the property had
been vested or deemed to have been vested in the Custodian [
by virtue of the said order made under section 6, as it stood
before its substitution by section 6 of the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016} such
property shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other
authority, continue to vest or be deemed to have been vested
in the Custodian and no person (including an enemy or
enemy subject or enemy firm) shall have any right or
deemed to have any right (including all rights, titles and
interests or any benefit arising out of such property) over the
said property vested or deemed to have been vested in the
Custodian.”.
7. In section 8 of the principal Act,— Amendment
of section 8.
(i) On and from the date of commencement of the

principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following sub-section

shall be substituted and shall always be deemed to have been

substituted, namely:—

“C1) With respect to the property vested in the
Custodian under this Act, the Custodian may take or
authorise the taking of such measures as he considers
necessary or expedient for preserving such property till
it is disposed of in accordance with the provisions of
this Act.”;

(ii) in sub-section (2),—
(a) after clause (i), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—

‘Gia) fix and collect the rent, standard rent, lease
rent, licence fee or usage charges, as the case may be,
in respect of enemy property;

(5) after clause (iv), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—

“(iva) secure vacant possession of the enemy
property by evicting the unauthorised or illegal
occupant or trespasser and remove unauthorised or
illegal constructions, if any.’.”.

[PAGE 6]
ee
|
{ ny 4
. \
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr f—
Insertion of 8. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following section
aA. Section shall be inserted, namely:—
Sale of “8A.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
property judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other
Coast odian. authority or any law for the time being in force, the Custodian
may, within such time as may be specified by the Central
Government in this behalf, dispose of whether by sale or
otherwise, as the case may be, with prior approval of the
Central Government, by general or special order, enemy
properties vested in him immediately before the date of
commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Ordinance, 2016 in accordance with the provisions
of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property (Amendment
and Validation) Ordinance, 2016.

(2) The Custodian may, for the purpose of disposal of
enemy property under sub-section (/), make requisition of the
services of any police officer to assist him and it shall be the
duty of such officer to comply with such requisition.

(3) The Custodian shail, on disposal of enemy property
under sub-section (/) immediately deposit the sale proceeds
into the Consolidated Fund of India and intimate details
thereof to the Central Government.

(4) The Custodian shall send a report to the Central
Government at such intervals, as it may specify, for the enemy
properties disposed of under sub-section (7), containing such
details, (including the price for which such property has been
sold and the particulars of the buyer to whom the properties
have been sold or disposed of and the details of the proceeds
of sale or disposal deposited into the Consolidated Fund of
India) as it may specify.

(5) The Central Government may, by general or special
order, issue such directions to the Custodian on the matters
relating to disposal of enemy property under sub-section (2)
and such directions shall be binding upon the Custodian and
the buyer of the enemy properties referred to in that subsection and other persons connected to such sale or disposal.

(6) The Central Government may, by general or special

order, make such guidelines for disposal of enemy property
under sub-section (7).

[PAGE 7]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section,
the Central Government may direct that disposal of enemy
property under sub-section (/) shall be made by any other
authority or Ministry or Department instead of Custodian
and in that case al) the provisions of this section shall apply
to such authority or Ministry or Department in respect of
disposal of enemy property under sub-section (/).
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections
(2) to (7), the Central Government may deal with or utilise
the enemy property in such manner as it may deem fit.”.
9. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section Insertion of
shall be inserted, namely:— toa séction
“10A.(1) Where the Custodian proposes to sel] any enemy Power to issue
immovable property vested in him, to any person, he may on —°Tificate of
receipt of the sale proceeds of such property, issue a certificate sale.
of sale in favour of such person and such certificate of sale
shall, notwithstanding the fact that the original title deeds of
the property have not been handed over to the transferee, be
valid and conclusive proof of ownership of such property by
such person.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for
the time being in force, the certificate of sale, referred to in
sub-section (J), issued by the Custodian shall be a valid
instrument for the registration of the property in favour of the
transferee and the registration in respect of enemy property for
which such certificate of sale had been issued by the
Custodian, shall not be refused on the ground of lack of
original title deeds in respect of such property or for any such
other reason.”.
10. In section 11 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the © Amendment of
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— section 11.
“3) The Custodian, Deputy Custodian or Assistant
Custodian shail have, for the purposes of exercising powers
or discharging his functions under this Act, the same powers
as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
5 of 1908. Procedure, 1908, while dealing with any case under this Act, in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) requiring the discovery and inspection of
documents;
(5) enforcing the attendance of any person, including

[PAGE 8]
eee
( 1G?
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part li—
any officer dealing with Jand, revenue and registration
matters, banking officer or officer of a company and
. examining him on oath;
(c) compelling the production of books, documents
and other records; and
(d@) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or documents.”.
Amendment 41. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for
Oy section the words “two per centum”, at both the places where they occur,
7 the words "five per centum" shall be substituted.
Substitution 12. For section 18 of the principal Act, the following section
ofnew shall be substituted, namely:—
section for
section 18.
Transfer of “18. The Central Government may, on receipt of a
Prepeny representation from a person, aggrieved by an order vesting a
cnemy. property as enemy property in the Custodian within a period
property in of thirty days from the date of receipt of such order and after
certain giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard, if it is of the
cases. opinion that any enemy property vested in the Custodian
under this Act and remaining with him was not an enemy
property, ‘it may by general or special order, direct the
Custodian that such property vested as ehemy property in the
Custodian may be transferred to the person from whom such
property was acquired and vested in the Custodian.”.
Insertion of 13. On and from the date of commencement of the principal
new 8 Act, after section 18 (as so substituted by section 12 of this
section!8A. Ordinance), the following section shall be inserted and shall
always be deemed to have been inserted, namely:-—~
y
Income not “18A. Any income received in respect of the enemy
Hable to be property by the Custodian shal] not, notwithstanding that such
rerumed. property -had been transferred by way of sale under section 8A
or section 18, as the case may be, to any other person, be
retumed or liable to be returned to such person or any other
person.”.
Insertion of 14. After section 18A of the principal Act, (as so inserted by
aaa section 13 of this Ordinance), the following section shall be
. inserted, namely:—

[PAGE 9]
1 *
Sec. 1} THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
“18B. No civil court or other authority shall entertain any Bar of
suit or other proceeding in respect of any property, subject jurisdiction.
matter of this Act as amended by the Enemy Property

(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016, or any action

taken by the Central Government or the Custodian in this

regard.”.

15. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words “five Amendment of
hundred rupees” at both the places where they occur, the words Seton 20.
"ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted.

16. On and from the date of commencement of the principal Act, Amendment of
in section 22 of the principal Act, after the words “for the time Seton 22.
being in force”, the brackets and words “(including any law of
succession or any custom or usage in relation to succession of
property)” shall be inserted and shall always be deemed to have
been inserted.

17. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following section shall Insertion of
be inserted and shall always be deemed to have been inserted with "ew section
effect from the 2" July, 2010, namely:— 224.

“22A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, Validation.
decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority,—

(a) the provisions of this Act, as amended by the
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance,
2016, shall have and shall always be deemed to have effect
for all purposes as if the provisions of this Act, as amended
by the said Ordinance, had been in force at all material
times;

(5) any enemy property divested from the Custodian
to any person under the provisions of this Act, as it
stood immediately before the commencement of the
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance,
2016, shall stand transferred to and vest or continue to
vest, free from all encumbrances, in the Custodian in the
same manner as it was vested in the Custodian before such
divesting of enemy property under the provisions of this
Act, as if the provisions of this Act, as amended by the
aforesaid Ordinance, were in force at all material times;

(c) no suit or other proceedings shall, without
prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, be
maintained or continued in any court or tribunal or
authority for the enforcement of any decree or order or
direction given by such court or tribunal or authority

|

[PAGE 10]
10 ____THEGAZEYTEOFINDIAEXTRAORDINARY __[Par I~
directing divestment of enemy property from the Custodian
vested in him under section 5 of this Act, as it stood before
the commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment
and Validation) Ordinance, 2016, and such enemy property
shall continue to vest in the Custodian under section 5 of
this Act, as amended by the aforesaid Ordinance, as the
said section, as amended by the aforesaid Ordinance was in
force at all material times;

(d) any transfer of any enemy property, vested in the
Custodian, by virtue of any order of attachment, seizure or
sale in execution of decree of a civil court or orders of any
tribunal or other authority in respect of enemy property
vested in the Custodian which is contrary to the provisions
of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016, shall be
deemed to be null and void and notwithstanding such
transfer, continue to vest in the Custodian under this Act.”.
Amendment 18. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clause
of section (qd) shall be omitted.
Power 10 19. (/) Ef any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions
ain of of the principal Act, as amended by the Enemy Property
y (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016, the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as amended by the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Ordinance, 2016, or the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, as amended by the Enemy 40 of 1971.
Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016, as may
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section
after the expiry of two years from the date on which the Enemy
Property (Amendment and Validation) Bill, 2016, replacing the
Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016,
receives the assent of the President.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Amendment 20, In the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
of sections 2 Act,1971,—
and 3 of Act
40 of 1971.
(a) in section 2, in clause (e), after sub-clause (3), the

[PAGE 11]
— ——TTTETETT——————————— a,
. ,
° Sec. 1) THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll
a a Sn Sneereesennntnnenercmnnests eee Se A eae
following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:-——
“(4) any premises of the enemy property as defined in
clause (¢) of section 2 of the Enemy Property Act,
14 of 1968 1968.”;
(4) in section 3, in clause (a),—
(# in the second proviso, the word “and” shall be
omitted;
(ii) after the second proviso, the following proviso
shal] be inserted, namely:—
“Provided also that the Custodian, Deputy
Custodian and Assistant Custodian of the enemy
Property appointed under section 3 of the Enemy
14 of 1968. Property Act, 1968 shall be deemed to have been
appointed as the Estate Officer in cespect of those
enemy property, being the public premises, referred
to in sub-clause (4) of clause (e) of section 2 of this
Act for which they had been appointed as the
Custodian, Deputy Custodian and Assistant
Custodian under section 3 of the Enemy Property
Act, 1968.”.
21. Notwithstanding the cessation of the operation of the Savings.
Ord.40f2010. Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010,
34 of 1968. anything done or any action taken under the Enemy Property
40 of 1971. Act, 1968, or the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971, as amended by_ the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010, shall be deemed
to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions
of those Acts, as amended by the Enemy Property (Amendment
and Validation) Ordinance, 2010, as if the provisions of this: Act,
as amended by the said Ordinance had been in force at all .
materia} times.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE,
President.
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
"PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI—2016.
GMGIPMRND—4029GI(CRC)—07-01-2016