[PAGE 1]
THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
ACT, 1968
No.50 of 1968

(As modified vide Act No.14 of 1983,
20 of 1989 and 40 of 1999)

An Act to Provide for the constitution and regulation of an
armed force of the Union for the better protection and security of
Industrial Undertakings owned by the Central Government and certain
other Industrial Undertaking, employees of all such Industrial
Undertakings and to provide technical consultancy service to
industrial establishments in the private sector and for matters
connected therewith) Be it enacted by Parliament in the
Nineteenth Year of the Republic of India as follows :-

1. Short title, extent and commencement - (1) This Act may be called the
Central Industrial Security Force Act,1968.

(2) It extends to the whole of India.

(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2. Definitions (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires -

(a) "Director-General" means the Director-General of the Force appointed
under section 4;

(aa) "Enrolled member of the force" means any
subordinate officer, under officer or any other member of the Force
of a rank lower than that of an under officer;

(ab) "Force" means the Central Industrial Security Force
Intuited under section 3; (ac) "Force custody" means the arrest or
confinement of a member of the Force in accordance with rules made
under this Act.

(b) "Industrial Undertaking" means any undertaking pertaining to a
scheduled industry and includes an Undertaking engaged in any other
industry, or in any trade, business of service which may be
regulated by Parliament by law;

(c) "Industrial Undertaking in public sector" means an Industrial
Undertaking owned, controlled or managed by -

[PAGE 2]
(i) a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act
1956.

(ii) a corporation established by or under a Central Provincial or
State Act, which is controlled or managed by the Government.

(ca) "industrial establishment" means an industrial undertaking
or a company as defined under section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956
or a firm registered under section 59 of the India Partnership Act,
1932 which is engaged in any industry, or in any trade, business or
service.

(d) Omitted...

(e) 'Managing Director' in relation to an Industrial Undertaking,
means the person (whether called a managing agent, general manager,
manager, chief executive officer or by any other name) who exercises
control over the
affairs of that undertaking;

(f) 'Members of the Force" means a person appointed to the Force
under his Act..

(g) "Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;

(h) "Schedule Industry" means any industry engaged in the manufacture
or production of the articles mentioned in the First Schedule to the
Industries (Development and Regulations Act. 1951);( 65 of 1951)

(ha) "Subordinate Officer" means a person appointed to the Force as
an Inspector, a Sub-Inspector or an Asstt.Sub. Inspector.

(i) "Supervisory Officer" means any of the officers appointed under
Section 4 and includes any other officer appointed by the Central
Government as a Supervisory Officer of the Force.

(j) "Under Officer" means a person appointed to the Force as a Head
constable.

(2) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in Force in any
area shall, in relation to that area, be construed as a reference to
the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area."

3. Constitution of the Force :- (1) There shall be constituted
and maintained by the Central Government an Armed Force of the Union
to be called Central Industrial Security Force for the better
protection and

[PAGE 3]
security of Industrial undertakings owned by that Government
and to perform such other duties entrusted to it by the Central
Government.

(2) The Force shall be constituted in such manner, shall consist of
such number of "Supervisory Officers, Subordinate Officers, under
Officers and other enrolled Members" of the Force who shall receive
such pay and
other remuneration as may, be prescribed.

4. Appointment and powers of supervisory officers :-(1) The Central
Government may appoint a person to be the Director General of the Force
and may appoint other persons to be Inspectors General, Deputy
Inspector General, Commandants, Deputy Commandants or Assistant
Commandants of the Force.

(2) The "Director General" and every other supervisory officers
so appointed shall have, and may exercise such powers and authority
as provided by or under this Act.

5. Appointment of enrolled members of the Force :- The
"Appointment of the Enrolled Members of the force shall rest with the
Director General" who shall exercise the powers in accordance with rules
made under this Act. Provided that the powers of appointment
under this section may also be exercised by such other supervisory
officer as the Central Government may by order specify in this
behalf.

6. Certificates of Members of the Force:- (1) Every enrolled
members of the Force shall receive on his appointment a
certificate in the form specified in the Schedule, under the seal of
the Director-General or such
other supervisory officer as the Director General may specify in this
behalf, by virtue of which the person holding such certificate shall be
vested with the powers of an enrolled member of the Force.

(2) Such certificate shall cease to have effect whenever the person
named in it ceases for any reason to be "an enrolled member" of the
Force.

7. Superintendence and administration of the Force :- (1) The
perintendance of the Force shall vest with the Central Government, and
subject thereto and to the provision of this Act and of any rules

[PAGE 4]
made there under the command, supervision and administration of the
Force
shall vest in the Director General".

(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) the administration of
the Force within such local limits as, may be prescribed shall be
carried on by "An Inspector General, a Deputy Inspector
General, a Commandant, a Deputy Commandant or an Assistant
Commandant" in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of
any rules made there under and every supervisory officer placed
in charge of the protection and security of an industrial Undertaking
shall, subject to any direction that may be given by the Central
Government or the Director General in this behalf, discharge his
functions under the general supervision, direction and control of the
Managing Director of that Undertaking.

8. Dismissal, removal etc. of enrolled members of the Force :- Subject
to the provisions of article 311 of the Constitution and to such rules as
the Central Government may make under this Act supervisory officer may -
-(i) dismiss, remove, order of compulsory retirement or reduce in
rank any "enrolled" member of the Force whom he thinks remiss or
negligent in the discharge of his duty, or unfit for the same; or (ii)
award any one or more of the following punishments to any
"enrolled" member of the Force who discharge his duty in a careless or
negligent manner, or who by any act of his own renders himself unfit for
the discharge thereof, namely :-

(a) fine to any amount not exceeding seven days pay or reduction in pay
scale;

(b) drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty.

(c) removal from any office or distinction or deprivation of
any special emolument.

(d) withholding of increment of pay with or without cumulative
effect.

(e) withholding of promotion.

(f) Censure

9. Appeal and revision:- (1) Any "enrolled" member of the Force
aggrieved by an order made under section 8 may within thirty days from
the date on which the order is communicated to him prefer an appeal
against the order
to such authority as may be prescribed, and subject to the provisions
of sub section (2A), sub section (2B) and sub-section (3), the

[PAGE 5]
decision of the said authority thereon shall be final: Provided
that the prescribed authority may entertain the appeal after the
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if he is satisfied that
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filling the
appeal in time.

2) In disposing of an appeal the prescribed authority shall
follow such procedure as may be prescribed.(2A) Any enrolled
members of the Force aggrieved by an order passed in appeal under subsection (1) may,within a period of six months from the date on which the
order is communicated to him, prefer a revision petition against the
order to such authority as may be prescribed and in disposing of the
revision petition, the said authority shall follow such procedure
as may be prescribed.

(2B) The authority, as may be prescribed for the purpose of this
sub-section, on a revision petition preferred by an aggrieved
enrolled member of the Force or suo moto, may call for, within a
prescribed period, the records of any proceeding under section 8
of sub-section(2) or sub-section (2A) and such authority may, after
making inquiry in the prescribed manner, and subject to the
provisions of this Act, pass such order thereon as it thinks fit."

(3) The Central Government may call for an examine the record of
any proceeding under section 8 or under sub-section (2), sub section
(2A) or sub section (2B) of this section and may make such inquiry or
cause such inquiry to be made and subject to the provisions of this
Act, may pass such order thereon as it thinks fit;Provided that no order
imposing an enhanced penalty under sub-section (2) or subsection (3) shall be made unless a reasonable opportunity of being
heard has been given to the person affected by such order.

10. Duties of member of the Force:- It shall be the duty of every
member of the Force -a) Promptly to obey and execute all orders lawfuly
issued to him by his superior authority.

(b) to protect and safeguard the Industrial Undertaking owned
by the Central Government together with such other installations as
are specified by that Government to be vital for the carrying on of
work in those Undertakings, situate within the local limits of his
jurisdiction: Provided that before any installation not owned or
controlled by the Central Government is so specified, the Central
Government shall obtain the consent of the Government of the State in
which such installation is situate;

[PAGE 6]
(c) to protect and safeguard such other Industrial Undertakings and
installation for the protection and security of which he is deputed
under section 14;

(d) to protect and safeguard the employees of the Industrial
Undertakings and installations referred to in clauses (b) and (c)

(e) to do any other act conducive to the better protection and
security of the industrial undertakings and installations referred to
in clauses (b) and (c) and the employees referred in clause (d).(f)
to provide technical consultancy services relating to security of
any private sector industrial establishment under section 14A.

(g) to protect and safeguard the organizations owned or funded by
the Govt and the employees of such organizations as may be entrusted
to him by the Central Govt.

(h) any other duty which may be entrusted to him by the Central Govt.
from time to time.

11. Power to arrest without warrant :-

(1) Any member of the Force may, without any order from a
magistrate and without a warrant, arrest -

(i) any person who voluntarily cause hurt to, or attempts
untarily to cause hurt to, or wrongfully restrains or attempts
wrongfully to restrain or assaults, or uses, or threatens
or attempts to use
(criminal force to any employee, referred to in clause (d) of
section 10, or to him or any other member of the Force, in discharge
of his duty as such employee or in execution of his duty as such
member, as the case may be, or with intention to prevent or to deter
him from discharging his duty as such member, or in consequence of
anything done or attempted to be done by him in the lawful discharge
of his duty as such member.

(ii) any person who has concerned in, or against whom a reasonable
suspicion exists of his having been concerned in or who is
found taking precautions to conceal his presence under circumstances
which afford reason to believe that he is taking such precautions
with a view to committing, a cognizable offence which relates to
property longing, to or in the premises of any Industrial
Undertaking referred to in clause (b) and (c) of section 10, or
relates to the other installations, or to property in the
premises of the other installations, referred to in those clauses;

[PAGE 7]
(iii) any persons who commits or attempts to commit a cognizable
offence which involves or which is likely to involve danger to the life
of any person engaged in carrying on any work relating to any
Undertaking or
installations referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of section 10.

(2) If any person is found trespassing on the premises of any
Industrial Undertaking referred to in clauses (b) and (c) section 10,
he may without prejudice to any other proceedings which may be taken
against him be
removed from such premises by any member of the Force.

12. Power to search without warrant :- (1) Whenever any member of
the Force not below the prescribed rank has reason to believe that
any such offence as is referred to in section 11 has been or is
being committed and that a search warrant cannot be obtained without
affording the offender an opportunity of escaping or of concealing
evidence of the offence, he may detain the offender and search his
person and belongings forthwith and, if he thinks proper, arrest
any person whom he has reason to believe to have committed the
offence.

(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(2 of 1974)
relating to searches under that Code shall, so far as may be, apply to
searches under this section.

13. Procedure to be followed after arrest :- Any member of the Force
making an arrest under this Act, shall, without unnecessary delay,
make over the person so arrested to a police officer, or in the
absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him to be
taken to the nearest police station together with a report of the
circumstances occasioning the arrest.

14. Deputation of the Force to Industrial undertaking in public
sector :- (1) Subject to any general directions which may be
issued, by the Central Government, it shall be lawful for the
Director General on a request received in this behalf from the
Managing Director concerned, of an industrial Undertaking in public
sector showing the necessity there of to depute such number of members
of the Force as the Director General may consider necessary for
the protection and security of that industrial undertaking and
any installations attached thereto and the members of the Force so
deputed shall be at the charge the Managing
Director. Provided that in the case of an Undertaking owned,
controlled or managed :

[PAGE 8]
(i) by a Government company of which the Central government is
not a member.
(ii) by a corporation established by or under a Provincial or
State Act.No such request shall be entertained unless it is made with
the consent of the Government of the State in which the Undertaking is
situate.

(2) If the Director General is of the opinion that circumstance
necessitating the deputation of the member of the Force in relation to
an Industrial Undertaking under sub section (1) have ceased to exist
or for any other reason it is necessary so to do, he may, after
informing the Managing Director of that Industrial Undertaking,
withdraw the member of the Force so deputed. Provided that the
Managing Director may, on giving one month's notice in writing to the
Director General that the members of the Force so deputed shall
be withdrawn, and the Managing Director shall be relieved from the
charge from the date of expiration of such notice or from any earlier
date on which the Force is so withdrawn.

(3) Every member of the Force, which discharging his functions
during the period of deputation, shall continue to exercise the
same powers and be subject to the same responsibilities, discipline and
penalties as would have been applicable to him under this Act, if he
had been discharging those functions in relation to an industrial
undertaking owned by the Central Government.

14A(I) Subject to any general directions which may be issued by the
Central Govt. it shall be lawful for the Director General, on a
request received from the Managing Director of an industrial
establishment in the private sector or any other person authorized by him
in his behalf, to direct the members of the Force to provide
technical consultancy services relating to security, to such
industrial establishments in such manner and on payment of such fee as
may be prescribed.

(2) The fee received under sub-section (1) shall be credited to the
salivated Fund of India. Explanation - For the purpose of this section,
the expression "Managing Director" in relation to an industrial
establishment, means the person (whether called general manager,
manager, chief executive
officer, or a partner of a firm or by any other name) who exercises
control over the affairs of the establishment."

15. Officers and Members of the Force to be considered
always on duty and liable to be employed anywhere in India :- (1)

[PAGE 9]
Every member of the Force shall, for the purpose of this Act, be
considered to be always on duty, and shall, at any time be liable to be
employed at any place within India.

(2) Save as provided in section 14, no member of the Force shall
engage himself in any employment of office other than his duties under
this Act.

15A. Restrictions respecting right to form association etc :- (1) No
member of the Force shall, without the previous sanction in written of
the Central Government or the prescribed authority,

(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any
trade union, labour union, political associations or with any class
or trade unions, labour unions or political associations; or

(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any other
society, institution, association or organization that is not recognized
as part of the Force or is not of a purely social, recreational or
religious nature, or

(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published
any book letter or other document except where such communication or
publication is in the bona fide discharge of his duties or is of a purely
literary, artistic or scientific character or is of a prescribed
nature :

Explanation :- In any question arises as to whether any society
institution association or organization is of a purely social,
recreational or religious nature under clause (b) of this sub-section the
decision of the
Central Government thereon shall be final.

(2) No member of the Force shall participate in, or address, any
meeting or take part in any demonstration organized by any body of
person for any political purposes or for such other purposes as
may be prescribed.

16. Responsibilities of member of the Force during suspension :- A
member of the Force shall not by reason of his suspension from office
ceases to be a member of the Force and he shall during that period, be
subject to the same responsibilities, discipline and penalties to which
he would have been subject if he were on duty.

[PAGE 10]
17. Surrender of certificate arms etc. by persons ceasing to be
members of the Force :-

(1) Every person who for any reason ceases to be 'an enrolled' member of
the Force, shall forthwith surrender to any supervisory officer
empowered to receive the same, his certificate of appointment, the arms,
accoutrements, clothing and other articles which have been furnished to
him for the performance of duties as an enrolled member of the Force.

(2) Any person who willfully neglects or refuse to surrender his
certificate of appointment or the arms, accoutrements, clothing and
other articles furnished to him, as required by sub-section (1) shall on
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a terms which may
extend to one month or with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees,
or with both.

(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any
article which, under the orders of the Director General, has become
the property of the person to whom the same was furnished.

18. Penalties for neglect of duty etc :-

(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 8, every
member of the Force who shall be guilty of any violation of duty or wilful
breach or neglect of any Rule or regulations or lawful orders made
by a
Supervisory officer, or who shall withdraw from the duties of his
office without permission, or who, being absent on leave, fails without
reasonable cause, to report himself for duty on the expiration of the
leave, or who engages himself without authority in any
employment other than his duty as a member of the Force or who shall be
guilty of cowardice, may be taken into Force custody and shall, on
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year.

(2)Notwithstanding anything contained, in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 at 1974) an offence punished under this section
shall be cognizable and non-bail able.

(2A)Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Central Government may invest the
Commandant with the powers of a Magistrate of any class for the purpose of
inquiry into or trying any offence committed by an enrolled member of the
Force and punishable under this Act, or any offence committed
by an enrolled member of the Force against person or property of
another member of the Force.
Provided that --

[PAGE 11]
(i) When the offender is on leave or absent from duty; or

(ii) when the offence is not connected with the
offender's duties as an enrolled member of the Force; or

(iii) when it is petty offence even if connected with
the offender's duties as an enrolled member of the Force; or

(iv) when, for reason to be recorded in writing, it is
not practicable for the Commandant invested with the powers of a
Magistrate to inquire into or try an offence, the offence may, if the
prescribed authority within the limits of whose jurisdiction the offence
has been committed so requires, be inquired into or tried by an
ordinary Criminal Court having jurisdiction in the matter.

(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to prevent any member of the Force from being prosecuted
under any other law for any offence made punishable by that law, or
for being liable under any such law to any other or higher penalty or
punishment than is provided for such offence by this section.

Provided that no person shall be punished twice for the
same offence.

19. Application of Act 22 of 1922 to member of the
Force:- The Police (Incitement to Disaffection) Act, 1922, shall
apply to members of the Force as it applies to member of a Police Force.

20. Certain Acts not to apply to Members of the Force :-
Nothing contained in the payment of wages Act, 1936, or the Industrial
Disputes Act 1947, on the Factories Act 1948, or any corresponding
law relating to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes
in force in a State shall apply to member of the Force.

21. Protection of acts of members of the Force :- (1)In any
suit or proceeding against any member of the Force for any act done by
him in the discharge of his duties, it shall be lawful for him to
plead that such act was done by him under the order of a competent
authority.

2. Any such plea may be proved by the production of the
order directing and it is so proved, the member of the Force shall
thereupon be discharged from any liability in respect of the
act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction
of the authority which issued such order.

[PAGE 12]
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, any legal proceeding, whichever civil or
criminal, which may lawfully be brought against any member of the
Force for anything done or intended to be done under the powers
conferred by, or in pursuance of, any provisions of this Act or the
Rules there under shall be commenced within three months after the
act complained or shall have been committed and not otherwise; and
notice in writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall be
given to the person concerned and his supervisory officer at least
one month before the commencement of such
proceeding.

22. Power to make rules :- (1) The Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make Rules for carrying out the
purposes of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power such rules may provide for -

(a) regulating the classes, ranks grades, pay and
remuneration of members of the Force and their conditions
of service in the Force;
(b) regulating the powers and duties of members of the
Force authorised to exercise any functions by or under this Act;

(c) fixing the period of service for Members of the Force.

(d) prescribing the description and quantity of arms,
accoutrements, clothing and necessary articles to be furnished to the
Members of the Force;

(e) prescribing the place of residence of members of the
Force;

(f) institution, management and regulations by any fund
for any purpose connected with the administration of the Force;

(g) regulating the punishments and prescribing
authorities to whom appeals shall be preferred from orders of
punishment or remission of fines or other punishments, and the
procedure to be followed for the disposal of such appeals;

(gg) regulating matters with respect to Force custody under
this Act including the procedure to be followed for taking person into
such custody;

[PAGE 13]
(ggg) regulating matters with respect to disposal of cases
relating to offences under this Act and specifying the places in which
person convicted under this Act may be confined;

(gggg) prescribing authority under sub-section (2A) of section
9 and the procedure to be followed by such authority in disposing of
the revision petition;

(ggggg) prescribing authority under sub-section (2B) of section
9, the period within which such authority may call for the records
and the manner in which such authority may make inquiry."

(h) the terms and conditions subject to which member of the
Force may be deputed under section 14 and the charges there for;

(hh) the manner in which and the fee on payment of which
the technical consultancy services shall be provided under subsection (1) of section 14A; and

(i) any other matter which has to be or may be
prescribed or in respect of which rules are required to be made under
this Act.

(3) Every rules made under this section shall be laid as soon
as possible may be after it is made before each House of Parliament
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and
before its expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive aforesaid both House agree in making any modification
in the rule, or both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule, or both Houses
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be,
so however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 6)

A. B. has been appointed an enrolled member of the Central
Industrial Security Force under the Central Industrial Security Force
Act, 1968, and is vested with the powers, functions and privileges of
an enrolled member of the Force.

[PAGE 14]
APPENDIX
THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE
(AMENDMENT) ACT, 1983
(14 of 1983)

14. (1) The force constituted under the Principal Act as
functioning immediately before the commencement of this Act (hereafter
in this section referred to as the existing Force) shall, on such
commencement, be deemed to be the force constituted under the
principal Act amended by this Act, and every member of the existing
force holding immediately before such commencement an office mentioned
in column (1) of the Table below shall,
on such commencement, be deemed to have been appointed to the office
mentioned in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the said Table.

TABLE

1. Chief Security Officer Commandant
2. Deputy Chief Security Officer Deputy Commandant
3. Security Officer Assistant Commandant
4. Head Security Guard Head Constable
5. Senior Security Guard Naik
6. Security Guard Constable

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub- section
(1), any member of the existing Force may, within thirty days from
the commencement of this Act, exercise his option by notice in writing
to the Director General.

(a) if such a member had been on deputation to the existing
Force from any other service, to revert to such other service, and

(b) in any other case, to retire from service, and an option
so exercised shall be final, and member exercising such option
shall be permitted, within 30 days from the date on which he exercises
such option to revert to the service from which he had
been on deputation or, as the case may be, to retire from service.

Explanation : For the purposes of this section the
expression "member" includes an officer, and the expression
"Director General" shall have the same meaning as in the principal
Act as amended by this Act.

************

[PAGE 15]
CONTENTS
--------------------------------------------------------
Section No. Subject Page NO.
--------------------------------------------------------

1. Short title extent and commencement 1
2. Definitions 1 - 2
3. Constitution of the Force 3
4. Appointment and powers of supervisory officers 3
5. Appointment of enrolled members of the Force 3
6. Certificates of members of the Force 3
7. Superintendence and administration of the Force 4
8. Dismissal removal etc. of enrolled members of 4
the Force.
9. Appeal and revision 5
10. Duties of member of the Force 6
11. Power to Arrest without warrant 7
12. Power to search without warrant 7
13. Procedure to be followed after arrest 8
14. Deputation of the Force to industrial 8
undertakings in public sector
14(A) To provide technical consultancy services 9
to industrial establishments
15. Members of the Force to be considered 9
always on duty and liable to be employed
anywhere in India.
15(A)Restriction respecting right to form 10
association etc.
16. Responsibilities of members of the Force 10
during suspension.
17. Surrender of certificate, arms etc., by 10
persons ceasing to be members of the Force.
18. Penalties for neglect of duty etc. 11
19. Application of Act 22 of 1922 to members 12
of the Force.
20. Certain acts not apply to members of the Force 12
21. Protection of acts of members of the Force 12
22. Power to make rules 13
-- The Schedule (See Section 6) 14
-- Appendix 15