[PAGE 1]
charm ah gee T)O4 D007 206—08 KEGISTERED NO. [LNT 2006—04
yi
Taree]
EXTRAORDINARY
' . 7 I BE |
| FART ti — Section 1
I safe @ warfare
PUBLISHED BY ALTHORITY
th 55) aq fereil, shear, aera 6, 2008 / walle js, 1928
Nu. 55] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, NOVEMBER 6, 2006! KARTIRA 15, 1928
ea 4 fest pea em & oe fer fe ae aren heer Se Te a
Separate paging is given to this Pant in order that i may be Qed ot a separate compilation.
¢ MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
. New Outil, the 61h Navember 2006/Marvibae 15, 1928 (Sukie)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the Presideat on
the Jrd November, DOI, and is hereby published for gemeral befiormesticen: -
THE ASSAM RIFLES ACT, 2006
No. 47 of 2006
[Je Nevewtber, 2006.|
AAct to consolidate and aniend the law relating to the governance of the Assam
Rifles, an Armed Force of the Union for ensuring the security of the borders
of India, to carry out Counter Insurgency Operations in the specified areas
and toact inaid of civil amthorities forthe maintenance of the law and order
and for matters connected therewith,
Bott enacted by Parliament inthe Filty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as
| fullows:
CHAPTER!
Pavamraay
4. (1) This Act may bé called the Assim Rafles Act, 2006 Murat teibe
ail
(2) ft shall come imo force on such date as the Central Governmen may, by comnowcceut
fotification m the iicial Gagete, appoint
\

[PAGE 2]
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Paxr
a ewe
(Definitions. 2. (J) In this Act, unless the context otherwise roquires,—
(a) “active duty”, in relation to a person subject to this Act, means any duty as
a member of the Force during the period in which such person is attached to, oF
forms part of, a unitof the Foree—
(W which is engaged in operations against an.enemy or an insurgent or a
terrorist or any person in arms against the Union, or
(ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged on patrol or other guard duty
along the borders of India,
and includes duty by such person during any period declared by the Central Giovern=
ment, by notification in the Official Gazette, asa period of active duty with reference to
any area in which or under any pravision of this Act or for the purposes of any other
. lawy for the time being in force, any person or class of persons subject to this Act may
be serving;
(#)“Assam Rifles Court” means a Court referred to in section 86; :
(c) “battalion” means a unit of the Force constituted as battalion by the Central
Government,
(d) “Chief Law Officer” and “Law Officer" mean, respectively, the Chief Law
Officer and a Law Officer of the Force appointed by the Central Government,
(e) “civil offence” means an offence which is triable bya criminal court;
(f) “civil prison” means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal
prisoner under the Prisons Act, 1894, orunder any other law for the time being in force, 9 of 1894
(2)"Commandant”, when used in any provision of this Act with reference to any
unit of the Force, means the officer whose duty it ks under the rules or regulations or in
the absence of such rules or regulations, by custom of the service, to discharge with
respect to that unit, the functions of a Commandant in regard to maiters of the description
referred to in that provision;
(A) “criminal court” means a court of ordinary criminal justice in any part of
India; -
(i) “deputation” means a period for which the services of a person belonging to
any department of the Central Government are placed at the disposal of the Director
General;
. (/) “Director-General” and “Additional Director-General” mean, the Director-
General and Additional Director-General of the Force appointed under sub-section
(2) and (2) of section 5, respectively;

(k) “enemy” includes all armed mulineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates,
terrorists and any person in arms against whom it is the duty of any person subject to
this Act to take action;

(“enrolled person” means.an under-officer or other person enrolled under this
Act,

(m) “Force” means the Assam Rifles;

: (n) “Force custody” means the arrest or confinement of a member of the Force
according to rules and inchades any military custody of such member under the Army
: Act, 1950, 46 of 1950.
; (o) “Inspector-General” and “Deputy Inspector-General” mean, respectively,
} the Inspector-General and the Deputy Inspector-General of the Force appointed under
| sub-section (2) of section 5;

[PAGE 3]
* See. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY i i
——————————————————— |
(p) “member of the Force” means an officer, a subordinate officer, an under+
officer of other enrolled person and includes the persons on deputation;
(q) “notification” means a notification published in the Oficial Gazette; |
(r) “offence” means any act or omission punishable under this Act and includes
acivil offence;
(a) “officer” means a person appointed or in pay a8 an officer of the Force; but :
does not include a subordinate officer or an under-officer;
(0 “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(u) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Central Government under
this Act; 1
|
(v) “rule” means a rule made under this Act;
(w) “subordinate officer” means a person appointed or in pay as a Subedar
Major, a Subedar or a Naib Subedar of the Force;
(x) “superior officer", when used in relation to a person subject to this Act,
means— 1
(i) any member of the Force ora person on deputation to whose command
such person is for the time being subject in accordance with the rules, i
(id) any officer of higher rank or class or of a higher grade in the same class, f
and includes when such person is not an officer, a subordinate officer or an umder- !
officer of higher rank, class or grade,
Q) “terrorist” means any person who, with intent to overawe the Government as
- by law established or to strike terror in the people or any section of the people or to
alienate any section of the people or to adversely affect the harmony amongst different
sections of the people, docs any act or thing by using bombs, dynamite or other :
explosive substances or inflammable substances ar fire-anms. or other lethal weapons
oF poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or any other substances (whether
biological or otherwise) ofa hazardous nature in such a manner, as to Cause or is likely
to cause death of, or injury to, any person or persons, or damage to, or destruction of,
property or disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community,
(2) “under-officer” means a Warram Officer, Havildar, Naik and Lance Naik of the
Foree;
(sa) “unit” means any—
(i) battalion; or
(i)regiment; or
(iH) training institution; or i
(i) Head Quarters of Deputy Inspector-General; or '
{v) Head Quarters of Inspector-General, or
F (vi) Head Quarters of Director-General,
of the Force and includes any other formation of the Force specified, by notification,
by the Central Government, .
(2) Words and expressions used and mot defined in this Act but defined in the Indian
4 of 1440. Penal Code shall have the meanings assigned to them in that Code.

[PAGE 4]
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDLA EXTRAORDINARY (Pawn il
— eee ae
(2) In this Act, reference to any law not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir
shall be construed as references to the corresponding law in force in that State,
Porsums 3. (1) The following persons (whether on deputation or otherwise employed) shall
_ to this he subject to this Act, wherever they may be, munely:—
(a) officers and subordinate officers, and
(b) under-officers and other persons enrolled under this Act,
(2) Members off the Force in existence af the commencement of this Act shall be Ra
deemed to have been appointed or, as the case may be, enrolled as such under this Act, {
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), any person who is employed
in the Force on deputation from the regular Army as defined under clause (xvi) of section 3
of the Army Act, 1950 shall not be subject to this Act and shall, during the period of such '§
deputation, be deemed to be subject ta the Army Act, 1950: ia VSD, ’
Provided that such person in regard to his duties and discipline shall be deemed to be r
under the command of the member of the Force under whose commund such person for the
time being is placed: : |
Provided further that, in case of such person, for the purposes of his duties and :
discipling, the expression “active duly” defined in clause (a) of sub-section {/) of sectum 2 i
shall be deemed to be the “active service" as defined im clause (1) of section 3 of the
Amy Act, 1950 for taking any action against him under the provisions of the suid Army Act. 46 of 1950
(4) Any person who is not subject to this Act is posted for any service with the
members of the Force or engaged to accompany with or to provide any service in any manner 7
to the members of the Force in such—
(A) camp;
. (2) line of march;
(aii) frontier post; . .
iv) active duty; or
(v) counter insurgency operations, .
as may be specified, by notification, by the Central Government in this behalf shall be t
deemed to be a member of the Force, till he is so posted or engaged in sueh corresponding ;
rank as may be determined, by notification, by the Central Government for the purposes of
Uhis Act. -
~ (5) Every.person subject to this Act shall remain so subject until retired, discharged, i
released, removed or dismissed from the Force in accordance with the provisions of this Act
and the rules,
CHAPTER IL
CONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE FORCE
Constitulvan 4.(/) There shall be anarmed force of the Union called the Assam Rifles for ensuring
alt Farce. the security of the borders of india, to carry oul counter insurgency operations in the
Specified areas and to act in aid of civil authorities for the maintenance of law and order aed
the matters connected therewith, ;
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Force shall be reconstituted in such
manner as may be prescribed and Whe conditions of service of the members of the Force sinall
be such as may be prescribed.

[PAGE 5]
Sec. t} THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 |
eae ehh |
5. (4) The general superintendence, direction and control of the Force shall vest in, Control, |
and be exercised by, the Central Government and subject thereto and to the provisions of direstion, ete,
this Act and the rules and regulations, the command and supervision of the Farce shall vest |
in.an officer to be appointed by the Central Government as the Director-General of the Force,
(2) The Director-General shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be assisted
by such number of Additional Director-General, Inspectors-General, Deputy Inspectors:
General, Commandants and other officers-as may be appointed by the Central Government. .
6. (/) The persons to be enrolled to the Force, the made of enrolment and the procedure — Eerolment. 7
for enrolment shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the rules and regulations,
every person who has, for a continuous period of three months, been in receipt of pay as a H
person enrolled under this Act and borne on the rolls of the Force shall be deemed to have |
been duly enrolled.

(3) No person who is nota citizen of India shall, except by the consent of the Central
Government signified in writing, be enrolled in the Force,

7. Every member of the Force shall be liable to serve in any parfof India as well as Liability for
outside India, service outside:

India.
8. No member of the Force shall be at liberty— Resignation
(a) to resign his appointment during the term of his engagement; or awl
(8) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment, trom (he Bal H
except with the previous permission in writing of the prescribed authority.
9. Every person subjectito this Act shall hold office during the pleasure of the President. Tenure of
service under
the Act

10. Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations, the Central ‘Termination
Cevernment may dismiss or remove from the service any person subject to this Act. a setvice by

cutral
Government,

11. (1) The Director-General, Additional Director-General or any Inspector-General — Dismissal,
may dismiss or remove from service or reduce to a lower grade or rank or the ranks any — temoval or
person subject to this Act other than an officer. ucts by

(2) An officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector-Genera? may dismiss or remove ae aad
from the service any person under his command other than an officer or asubordinate officer 4 Sth!
of such rank or the ranks as may be prescribed.

(3) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub-section (7) may reduce to a lower grade or
rank or the ranks any person under his command except an officer or a subordinate officer, ,

(4) The exercise of any power under this section shall be subject to the provisions of
this Act and the rules and regulations, *

12, A subordinate officer or an under-officer or other enrolled person who is retired, Certificate of :
discharged, released, removed or dismissed from service shall be furnished by the officer, to 'erminatian :
whose command he és subject, with a certificate in the language which is the mother-tongue *! **¥#
of such person and also in Hindi and English language sewing forh—

(a) the authority terminating his service;
: (4) the cause for such termination; and
{c} the full period off his service in the Force.

[PAGE 6]
& THE GAZETTE OF INDLA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr H—
Restrictions | 13. (No person subject to this Act shall, without the previous sanction in writing of i
on right 1 the Central Government or of the prescribed authority, — :
nae (a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour
ipecch, oe union, political association or with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political ;
_ associations; oF
(4) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society, institution,
association or organisation that is not recognised as part of the Force or is not ofa
purely social, recreational or religious nature, OF .
(c) communicate with the press oF publish or cause to be published any book, :
letter or other document except where such communication or publication is in the ‘
bonafide discharge of his duties or is of a purely literary, artistic oF scientific character t
or ig of a prescribed nature. .
Explanation. —\any question arises as to whether any society, institution, association }
or organisation is of a purely social, recreational or réligious nature under clause (6) af this
sub-section, the decision of the Central Government thereon shall be final. ;
(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take :
part in any demonstration organised by any body or persons for any political purposes or for ;
such other purposes as may be prescribed. i
i CHAPTER Ill H
SeRWCE PRIVILEGES ;
Authorised 14, The pay of every person subject to this Act due to him as such under any rules or 4
deduction oly gegulations for the time being in force shull be paid without any deduction other than the t
ibs wes deductions authorised by or under this Act or any otler Act. :
Remedy af. 15. (J) Any person subject to this Act other than an officer who deems himself wronged ;
aggrieved A by any officer or subordinate officer may complain to the officer under whose command or |
persons other ‘ .
pan afficers. orders he is serving.
(2) When the officer complained aysinst is the officer to wham any complaint should,
under sub-section (/), be preferred, the aggrieved person inay complain to such officer's
next superior officer. :
(2) Every officer receiving any such complaint stall muke ag complete an investigation ;
into itas may be possible for giving full redress to the complainant; or when necessary, refer ;
the complaint to superior authority. i
(4) Every such complaint shall be preferred in such manner as may, from time to time, be
specified by the Director-General. |
(5) The Central Government may revise any decision by the Director-General under i
sub-section (2), but, subject thereto, the decision of the Director-General shall be final.
Remedy of 16, Any officer who deems himself wronged by his Commandant of any superior
aagricved officer and who on duc application made to his Commandant or such superior officer does ;
“ieee not receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled, may complain to the Central
Government in such manner as may, from time to ime, be specified by the Director-General. i
Immunity 17. Neither the arms, clothes, equipment, accoutrements Or necessaries of any person ¥
free subject to this Act, nor any animal used by him for the discharge of his duty shall be seized, 1
attachment. ep shall, the pay and allowances of any such person or any prirt thereof, be attached, by |
direction of any civil of revenue court oF any revenue officer in satisfaction of any decree or
order enforceable against him.

[PAGE 7]
‘Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 !
————————E———————————— |
13. (/) No person subject to this Act shall, so long as he belongs to the Force, be liable | lenmunaty
lo be arrested for debt under any process issued by, or by the authority of, any civil or foe ares
revenue court or revenue officer, except with the prior consent of the Central Government. ora |
(2) The Judge of any such court or the said officer may examine into any complaint
made by such person or his superior officer of the arrest of such person conwary to the
provisions of this section and may, by warrant under his hand, discharge the person, and ;
award reasonable costs to the complainant, who may recover those costs in like manner as
he might have recovered costs awarded to him by a decree against the person obtaining the
process.
(3) For the recovery of such costs na court-fee shall be payable by the complainant.
19. (/) No Presiding Officer or member of an Assam Rifles Court, no Law Officer, no Immunity of |
party to any proceeding before an Assam Rifles Court, or his legal practitioner or agent and etn
no witness acting in obedience to a summons to attend an Assam Rifles Court shall, while ‘Assam Fates
proceeding to, attending or returning from, an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to arrest under Cour from
civil of revenue process. ares
(2) If any such person is arrested under any such process, he may be discharged by i
order of the Assam Rifles Court,
20. The rights and privileges specilied in the preceding section of this Chapter shall be — Savangs of
in addition 10, and not in derogation af, any other rights and privileges conferred on persons ae isd :
subject to this Act generally by any other law for the time being in force. en
twa. t
CHAPTERIV |
21. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is Offences ta
oO say relation to
3 the enemy
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post, place or guard, committed to ae anid
: wa a aie : puri i
his charge or which it is his duty to defend; or with death
(d) intentionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to this
Act or to army, naval, air force law or any member of other armed forces to abstain from
acting against the enemy or to discourage such person from acting against the enemy;
or
(c) in the presence of enemy, shamefully casts away his arms, ammunition, tools
oF equipment or mishehaves in such manner as to show cowardice, or
(d) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to,
the enemy oF any person in arms against the Union, or i
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy with money, arms, ammunition, stores .
or supplies or in any other manner whatsoever; or
(/) in time of active operation against the enemy imentionally occasions a false
alarm i action, camp, quarters or spreads or causes to be spread reports calculated to
create alarm or despondency, or
(g) in time of action leaves his Commandant or other superior officer or his post,
guard, picket, patrol or party without being regularly relieved or without leave; or
(4) having been captured by the enemy or made a prisoner of war, voluntarily
serves with or aids he enemy; or
(i) knowingly harbours oF protects an enemy not being a prisoner, or
(/) being a sentry in time of active operation against the enemy or alarm, sleeps
upon his post or is intoxicated; or ;

[PAGE 8]
§ THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Par Tl—
BS SS
- (k) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of the Force or
oo the army, naval, air forces of India or any other armed forces of the Central
Government co-operating therewith or any part of such forces,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as isin this Act mentioned.
Offences in 22. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that
relation We is to say,—
ihe enemy
and not (a) is taken prisoner or captured by the enemy, by want of due precaution or
punta through disobedience of orders, or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner
walk cea or 0 captured fails to rejoin his service when able € da so; or
(6) without due authority holds correspondence with, or communicates
intelligence to, the enemy or any person in league with the enemy or having come by
on the knowledge of any such correspondence or communication, wilfully omits to
discover it immediately to his Commandant or other superior officer,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to sufter imprisonment for a term
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act ment ioned.
Offences 23. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
punishable to sayy— .
more severcly
on active duty (a) forees a safeguard or forces or uses criminal force to a sentry, oF
than at other
times. (b) breaks into any house or other place in search of plunder; or
(c) being a sentry, sleeps upon his post or is intoxicated; or
- (cf) without orders from his superior officer, leaves his guard, picket, patrol or
aes posts; or
: (e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a false alarm in camp or quarters,
‘ or spreads or causes 10 be spread reports calculated to create unnecessary alarm or
despondency; or
7 (fi makes known the parole, watchword or countersign to any person not entitled
to receive it; or

(g) knowingly gives a parole, watchword or countersign different from what he

received,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court,—

(4) if he commits any such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less pumishment
as is in this Act mentioned, and

(8) if he commits any such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for aterm which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as
is in this Act mentioned.

Mutiny. 24. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
fo sayy

(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other person to cause any

, mutiny in the Force or in the army, naval or air forces of India or any forces cooperating therewith; or :
(4) joins in any such mutiny, or
‘ {e) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavours to
suppress the same, or

[PAGE 9]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY | 9 rT
_—————— |
|

(c) knowing of having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or
of any intgntion to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, dacs not, without delay, give :

information thereof to his Commandant or other superior officer; or

(e) endeavours to seduce any person in the Force or in the army, naval or air

forces of India or any forces cooperating therewith from his duty or allegiance to the

Union, |
shall, onconviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable te suffer death or such less punishment :
as is in this Act mentioned.

25, (f) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or attempts to desert the service Desertiva snd
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court,— aiding

desention
(a) if he commits the offence when on active duty or when under orders for |
active duty, be liable 10 suffer death or such less punishment as 16 in this Act mentioned;

and :

(5) if he commits the offence under any other circumstances, be liable to suffer

imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years OF such less punishment as

is in this Act mentioned. ; |

(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly harbours any such deserter shall,
on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. .

(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognisant of any desertion or altempt at i
desertion of a person subject to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own or some {
other superior officer, or take any steps in his power to cause such person to be apprehended,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned,

26. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is Absence
to say,— 7 without

leave
(a) absents himself without leave, or ‘
(b) without sufficient cause, oversiays leave granted te him; or a
{c} being on leave of absence and having received information from the

appropriate authority that any battalion or part thereof or any other unit of the Force,

to which he belongs, has been ordered on active duty, fails, without sufficient cause,

to rejoin without delay; or

(d) without sufficient cause, fails to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place
appointed for exercise or duty; or
(e) when on parade, of on the line of march, without sufficient cuuse or without
leave from his superior officer, quits the parade or line of march; of
: () when in camp or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, of in any place
prohibited, by any general, local or other order, without a pass oe written leave from his
superior officer; or
(g) without leave fram his superior officer or without due cause, absents himself .
' from any school when duly ordered to attend there, shall, on convietion by an Assam
Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for aterm which may extend to three years
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
27, Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, thut is Sinking or
to say,— threatening
. * superior
7 (a) uses criminal force te or assaults his superior officer; or afficers.
(6) uses threatening language to such officer; or

[PAGE 10]
10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY {Par 1—
(e) uses insubordinate language '0 such officer,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court *
(A) if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or, if the offence
is committed on active duty, be Hable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may
extend to fourteen years OF such less punishment os is in this Act mentioned, and
(B) in other cases, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term whieh may
extend to ten yours OF such less punishnecnt a5 is in this Act mentioned:
Provided that in the case of an offence specified in clause (c), the jmuprisonment.
shall now exceed five years.
Disobodienss 2a. (I) Any pecsom subject to this Act who disobeys, in such manner 2+ to show &
wo superior «wilful defiance of authority, any lawful command given personally by his superiar officer in
offieet the execution of his office whether the same is given orally, or in writing oF by signal or
otherwise, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for
aterm which may extend to fourteen years or such Jess punishment as js inthis Act mentioned.
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys way jaw{ul command given by his.
superior officer shall, on conviewion by an Assan Rifles Court,—

(a) if he commits such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer
imprisonment for a term which may extend 0 fourteen years or such Jess punishment
gs is in this Act mentioned; and

(b) if he commits such offence when nol on aetive duly, be lable to suiler
imprisonment for a tern which may extend to five years OF such less punistunert as is
inthis Act mentioned,
Iejmatoreinuatins 29. Any person subject 10 this Act who corumits any of the following offences, that is
a to aay,-—
ghatruction.

(a) being concerned in Unty quarrel, affray or disorder, refuses wo obey any
afficer, hough af inferior raruk, who orsbers bier into arrest, OF USES criminal foree 1 oF
assaults any such officer; oF

(by uses criminal force ta, or assaults any person, whether subject to this Actor
not, in whose custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he 1 oF is nat his superior
officer, or :

(c) resists an escort whose duly it is to apprehend him oF i have him in charg;
or

(a) breaks out of barracks, camp or quarters; or
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other onder, oF
(f) impedes the Farce Police referred to in section 85 or ally person fawfully
ucting on jts bebull, or when called upon, refuses to assist in the execution of his duty
a Force Police of any perso tawfully acting on his behalf,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend, inthe cuse of the offences specified in clauses (d) and (2), to two years
and in the case of the offences specilied in the other clauses, to ten yours, OF in cither case
. such less punistument as is in this Act mentioned.
Fraudulent 30, Any person subject i his Act who knowingly attempts to get enrolled or enrolls
entolinent any other person who does riot fulfil the conditions enabling him a be enrolled, shall, om
conviction by the Assam Wifles Court, be tuble te guffer imprisonment for aterm which may
extend to five years OF euch fess purisiument 23 js in this Act mentioned.
Falee answers 34, Any person having become subject to this Act who 15 discavered to have mache at
on enolment. qhe time of enrolment wilfully false answer fo any question set-forth in the presetibed:

[PAGE 11]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDLA EXTRAORDINARY 1 .
form of enrolment which has been put to him by the enrolling officer before whom he

appears for the purpose of being enrolled, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court,

be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or such less

punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

32. Any officer, subordinate officer or an under-officer who behaves in a manner Unbecoming
unbecoming his position and the character expected of him shall, on conviction by an Assam Sconduct.

Rifles Court, be liable to be dismissed or to suffer swch less punishment as is in this Act |
mentioned.

33, Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that ig Certain farms
to Say,— of disgraceful

conduct,
(a) is guilty ofany disgraceful conduct ofa cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or |
(6) malingers, orfeigns or produces disease or infirmity in himself or intentionally
delays his cure or aggravates his disease or infirmity, or
(¢) with intent to render himgelf or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily

causes hurt to himself or that person, |
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years or such fess punishment as is in this Act mentioned,

34. Any officer, subordinate officer or an under-officer who use’ criminal force to or — Wh-treating « i
otherwise ill-treats any person subject to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or position, — s¥bordinate, |
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term ;
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. |

35, Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state of intoxication whether on. Intoxication,
duty or not, shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for aterm which may extend to ix months or such less punishmentas is in this Act mentioned. :

36, Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is Permitting i
to Say,— cape of uy

* persan in

(a) when in command of guard, picket, patrol or post, relewses withoul proper custody.
authority, whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any persan committed to his
» charge, or refuses to receive any prigoner or person s0 committed; or
(6) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to escape any person who is

committed to his charge, or whom it is his duty to keep or guard,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer
imprisonment for aterm which may extend to ten years or such less punishment ag is in this
Act mentioned; and if he has not acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for aterm which may
extend to two years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned, 7

37, Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is Inegularny in
lo say,— . . connection

. with mest or

(a) unnecessarily detains & person in arrest or confinement without bringing him | ¢efinement.
to trial, or fails to bring his case before the proper authority for investigation; or .
(6) having committed a person to Force custody fails without reasonable cause

to deliver at the time of such committal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case

within forty-cight hours thereafter, to the officer or other person into whose custody

the person arrested is committed, an account in writing signed by himself of the

offence with which the persan so committed is charged,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. :

[PAGE 12]
. : 12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr ll—
—_—_——— eS eo
Eggape from 38. Any person subject to this Act who, being in lawful custody, escapes or altempls
custody. ta escape, shall, an cory iction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment
for aterm which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is inthis Act mentioned,
Offences in 39. Any person subject to this Aet who commits any of the following offences, that
respect of is to say,— properly.” .
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any
Force mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to this Act, or
‘ a (b) dishonestly misappropriates oF converts to his own use any such property,
or
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in respect of any such property; or
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such properly in respect of which any of
the offences under clauses (a), (6) and (c) has been committed, knowing or having
reason to believe the commission of such offence; oF ;
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Government entrusted to him;
or
(fj.does any ather thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one
person or wrongful loss to another person,
; shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as ig in this Act mentioned.
Extortion and 40. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
cacruption, to say,— -
; (a) commits extortion; or
a (b) without proper authority extracts from any person maney, provisions or
service,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Coun, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
Making away 41. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that
with is 10 Say,—
equipment,
(a) makes away with, or is concemed in making away with any arms, ammunition,
equipment, instruments, tools, clothing or any other thing being the property of the
Government issued to him for his use or entrusted to him, or
‘@) loses by neglect anything. mentioned in clause (a), or
; (c) sells, pawns, destrays or defaces any medal or decoration granted to him,
shall; on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
; which may extend, in the case of the offences specified in clause (a), lo ten years, and in the
case of the offences specified in the other clauses, to five years, ot in cither case such less
: punishment ag is in this Act mentioned.
Injury 10 42. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is
property. to say,—
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clausé (a) of section 41 or any
property belonging to any Force mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to
this Act, or ,
~~ () commits any act which causes damage to, oF destruction of, any property
of the Government by fire, or

[PAGE 13]
Sec, 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 |
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ileats or loses any animal entrusted to him, |
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer
imprisonment for aterm which may extend to ten years or such bess punishment as is in this |
Act mentioned; and if he has acted without reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment for a
term which may extend/1o five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned,
43. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is False
to say— aecusabions.
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing or
having reason to believe such accusation to be false; or
(5) in making complaint against any person subject to this Act, makes any
statement affecting the character of such person, knowing or having reason to believe ' |
such statement to be false, or knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material facts,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned, .
44, Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is Falsifying
10 Say official
document aed
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or other document made or signed false
by him, or of the contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy, knowingly declarations
makes, or is privy to the making of, any false or fraudulent statement; or
(b}in any document of the description mentioned in clause (a), knowingly makes, |
or is privy to the making of, any omission, with intent to defraud; or !
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person.or knowingly and with intent
to defraud, suppresses, defaces, alters or makes away with any document which it is
his duty to preserve or produce; or
(cd) where it is his official duty to make a declaration respecting any matter,
knowingly makes a false declaration; or
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension, allowance or other
advantage or privilege by a statement which is false, and which he either knows or
believes to be false or does not believe to be true, or by making or using false entry in
any book or record, or by making any document containing @ false statement, or by
omitting te make a tue entry or document containing a true statement,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
45, Any person subject to this Act whe commits any of the following offences, that ig Signing in
to siry,— blank and
. .. . Failure to
(2) when signing any document relating to pay, arms, ammunition, equipment, report
clothing, supplies or stores, or any property of the Government fraudulently leaves in
blank any material part for which his signature is a voucher, or
(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or send a report or return which
it is his duty to make or send, .
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a tere
which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
46. Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that Offences
is to say,— relating lo
Assam Rifles
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before an Assam Court
Rifles Court, wilfully or without reasonable excuse, makes default in attending; or

[PAGE 14]
ld THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr Ll—
nn = — ———SS Se
(4) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by an Assam
Rifles Court to be taken or made; or :
(c) refuses to produce or deliver any document in his power or control legally
required by an Assam Rifles Court to be produced or delivered by him, ar
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question which he is by law bound to
. answer, or
(v) is guilty of contempt of the Assam Rifles Court by using insulting or
threatening language, or by causing any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings
of such Court,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term

. which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

False 47. Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly sworn or affirmed betore

evidence any Assam Rifles Court or other court competent under this Act ta administer an oath or
affirmation, makes any statement which is false, and which heeither knows or believes to be
false or does not believe to be true, shall, on conviction by an Agsam Rifles Court, be liable
to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment
as is in this Act mentioned.

Untawtal 48. Any oflicer, subordinate officer or an under-officer who, having received the pay

Jetention of — of persan subject to this Act, unlawfully detains oF refuses to pay the same when due, shall,

pay, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

: Vialation of 49. Any person subject to this Act who is guilly of any act or omission which, though
good order not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the Force shall, on
and discipline, conyiction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for aterm which may

extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.
Miscellaneous 50. Any person subject to lis Act who commits any of the following oflences, that is
offences, 10 say,—

(a) being in command atany post or on the march, and receiving a complaint that
anyone under his command has beaten or otherwise mal-treated or appressed any
person, or has disturbed any fair or market, or committed any riot or trespass, fails ta
have due reparation made to the injured person or to report the case lo the proper
authority, oF

: (0) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise, intentionally insults the religion,
or wounds the religious feelings of any person, oF

(c) attempts to commit suicide, and in such attempt does any act towards the
commission of such offence; or

(d) being below the rank of subordinate officer, when off duty, appears without
proper authority, in or about Camp, oF when going to, or returning from, any town or
bazaar, carrying a rifle, sword or other offensive weapons, oF

(c) directly or indirectly accepts or abtains, or agrees to accepl, or attempts Lo
obtain, for himself or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or reward for
: ; procuring the enrolment of any person or leave of absence, promotion or any other
advantage or indulgence for any person in the service; oF
; . (A commits any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or
residelt in, the country in which he is serving,
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.

[PAGE 15]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF [INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 . j
$1. Any person subject to this Act who atiempts to commit any of the offences — Atempr.

specified in sections 21 to 50 (both inclusive) and in such attempt does any act towards the

commission of the offence shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, where no express |

provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such attempt, be liable,—

(a) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death, to suffer :
imprisonment for aterm which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment :
as is in this Act mentioned; and

(5) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment to
suffer imprisonment fora term which may extend to one-half ofthe longest term provided
for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. !

|
52. Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences — Abeument of
specified in sections 21 to $0 (both inclusive) shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, flemces that
if the Act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no express provision is have an :
made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment sommes
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned,
$3, Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences Abetment of
punishable with death under sections 21, 24 and clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 25 eee
shall, on conviction by an Assam Rifles Court, if that offence, be not committed in oath death i
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act forthe punishment — and not
of such abelment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen committed |
years of such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. F
44. Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission af any of the offences Abetment of
specified in sections 21 to $0 (both inclusive) and punishable with imprisonment shall, on @Menses
conviction by an Assum Rifles Court, if'that offence, be not committed in consequence of the el
abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, — iquprisoament
be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to one-halfofthe longest term and aot
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned. commitied,
55, Subject to the provisions of section 56, any person subject to this Act who at any Civil
place in, or beyond, India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an o!tences
offence against this Act and, if charged therewith under this section, shall be liable to be tried
by an Assam Rifles Court and, on conviction, be punishable as follows, that is to say,—
7 (a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in
India with death, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment assigned for the offence, :
by the aforesaid law and.swch less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and

(6) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment assigned for the
offence by the law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to :
seven years, or such less punishment as in this Act mentioned.
$6. A person subject to this Act who commits an offence of murder or of culpable Civil offences i

homicide not amounting to murder against, or of rape in relation to, a person mot subject to et Ulable by .
this Act shall not be deemed to be guilty of an offence against this Act and shall not be tied Hila: Cou
by an Assam Rifles Court, unless he commits any of the said offences, —

(a) while on active duty; or

(b) at any place outside India; or

(c) at any place specified by the Central Government, by notification in this
behalf. '

[PAGE 16]
lé THE GAZETTE OF INDLA EXTRAGRDINARY {Pant Ll— t
ca BSL ee
———— SS ee SS ee :
CHAPTER ; t
PuNisHMenrs
Punishment 47. (J) Punishments may be inflicted in respect of offences committed by persons
awardable by gubjectto this Actand convicted by the Assam Rifles Courts, according to the scale following. j
Assam Rilles qhat jg tasayjy— —~ ;
Courts. '
(a) death;
(}) imprisonment which may be for the term af life or any other lesser term but |:
excluding imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Farce custody;
(c) dismissal from the service; 3
; (a) compulsory retirement from service; Bs
(e) imprisonment far a term not exceeding three months in Force custody except |
in case of officers and subordinate officers,
(f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or place in the list of their i
rank in the case of an under-officer;
(2) forfeiture of seniority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part ofthe service for :
ihe purpose of pramation, it
: _ (A) forfeiture of service far the purpose of increased pay, pension or any other Bs
prescribed purpose, f
(ip fine; ; é
(severe reprimand or reprimand except jn the case of persons below the rank of :
an under-officer; E
(4) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for *
_ an offence committed on active duty, Hl
(i) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to dismissal fram the service af all :
arrears of pay and allowances and other public money duc to him at the time of such F
dismissal; ‘
(m) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned t
by the offence for which he is convicted is made good. i
(2) Bach of the punishments specified in sub-section (/) shall be deemed tobe inferior f
in degree to every punishment preceding it in the above seale, . H
Alternative 58. Subject to the provisions of this Act, an Assam Rifles Court may, on convicting a ¢
AO be person subject to this Act of any of the offences specified in sections 21 to 54 (both inclusive) :
ain viles — aWard either the particular punishment with which the offence is stated in the said sections Hi
Courts. to be punishable or, in liew thereof, any of the punishments lower in the scale set out in
section $7 regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence.
Combination 50, Asentence ofan Assam Rifles Court may award in addition to, or without any one :
of other punishment, the punishment specified in clause (¢) af sub-section (1) of section 37,
punistments. and any one mare of the punishments specilied in clauses (fi to (mi) (bath inclusive) of that F
sub-section. :
Retention in GO. When on active duty, any enrolled person has been sentenced by an Assam Rifles
the Force of a Court ta dismissal orto imprisonment whether combined with dismissal or not, the prescribed
persot officer may direct that such person may be retained to serve in the ranks, and sueh service |
convicled on A . . :
cective duty Shall be reckoned as part of his term of imprisonment, if any. |
Punishments 61. Punishments may also be inilicted in respect of offences committed by persons
otherwise than gubject ta this Act without the imervention of an Assam Rifles Court in the manner stated in
0 an oa sections 62, 64, 65 and 66.

[PAGE 17]
Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDLA EXTRAGRDINARY 17 /
Sec) er |
62. Subject to the provisions of section 63, a Commandant or such other officer as ig, Minor
with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director-General may, in the Pumishrncnts, |
preseribed manner, proceed against a person subject to this Act, otherwise than as.an officer
or a subordinate officer or a Warrant Officer who is changed with an offence under this Act
and award such person to the extent prescribed, one or more of the following punishments,
that ig t say— = : '
(a) imprisonment in Force custody up to twenty-eight days; i
(5) detention up to twenty-eight days;,
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty-eight days;
(a) extra guards or duties;
(2) deprivation of any special position or special emoluments or any acting rank
or reduction to a lower grade of pay; i
() forfeiture of good service and good conduct pay;
(g) severe reprimand or reprimand;
(4) fine up to fourteen days" pay in any one month;
(i) deduction from his pay and allowances of any sum required ta make good
such compensation for any expense, loss, damage or destruction caused by him to
the Central Government, or any building or property as may be awarded by his
‘Commandant,
63. (J) In the case of an award of two or more of the punishments specified in Limit of ;
clauses (a), (4), (e) and (@) of section 62, the punishments specified in clause (c) or clause = P¥Y ishonents
(u) shall take effect only at the end of the punishment specified in clause (a) or clause (b). unisy weston
(2) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clauses (a), (6) and
(¢) are awarded to a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said
punishments, the whole extent of the punishments shall not exceed in the aggregate fortytwo days.
(3) The punishments specified in the said clauses (a), (b) and (¢) shall not be awarded
to any person who is of the rank of an under-officer or was at the time of committing the
offence for which he is punished of such rank,
(¥) The punishments specified in clause (g) of section 62 shall not be awarded to any
person below the rank of an under-officer,
64. () An officer not below the rank of the Deputy Inspector-General or such other Punishment
officeras is, with the consent of the Central Government, specified by the Director-General of
may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against an officer below the rank of a Deputy accis bela “
Commandant and of any rank of subordinate officer and of the rank of Warrant Officer who Deputy
ig charged with an offence under this Act and award one or more ofthe following punishments, Commandant,
that is to say,— subordinate
MN d
(2) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion ‘Wana
depends upon the length of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion Officer by
for a period not exceeding twelve months, but subject to the right of the accused Deputy
previous to the award fo elect to be tried by an Assam Rifles Court; aoe ea
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand; others, Pi
(ch stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence of which he is convicted is made good.
(2) Inevery case in which punishment has been awarded under sub-section (/), certified
true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the officer
awarding the punishment to the prescribed superior authority who may, if the punishment
awarded, appears to him to be illegal, unjust orexcessive, canoe], vary or remil the punishment
and make such other direction as may be appropriate in the circumstances of the ease.

[PAGE 18]
18 THE GAZETTE OF INDLA EXTRAORDINARY (Paar
Punishment 65. (/) An officer not below the rank of the Inspector-General or such other officer as
of oe is, with the consent of the Central Government, spec ified by the Director-General may, inthe
be ia prescribed manner, proceed against an officer below the rank of a Commandant and any
Commandant, subordinate officer anda Warrant Officer who is charged with an offence under this Act and
subordinate award one or morc.of the following punishments, that is 10 say,—
officers and . .
Warrant (a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends
Officer by the upon the length of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a
eel and period not exceeding twelve months, but subject to the right of the accused previous
others. io the award to elect to be tried by an Assam Rifles Court,

()) severe reprimand or reprimand,
: (c) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence of which he is convicted is made good. ‘

(2) Inevery case in which punishment has been awarded under sub-section (/), certified
true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the officer
awarding the punishment to the prescribed superior authority who may, if the punishment
awarded appears to him to be illegal, unjust or excessive, cancel, vary or remit the pumshinent
and make such other direction as may be appropriate in the circumstances of the case.

Punishment 66. A Commandant or such other officer as is, with the consent of the Central
of subordinate Government, specified by the Director-General may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against
rail any subordinate officer or a Warrant Officer who is charged with an affence under this Act
Giticer by and award one or more of the following punishments, that is to say,—
Commandant (a) severe reprimand oF reprimand,
(6) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned
by the offence of which he ts convicted is made good;

Provided that the punishment mentioned under clause (a) shall only be awarded by an
officer not below the rank of Commandant authorised by the Dircetor-General to award such
punishment.

Callestive 67. (/) Whenever any weapon of part of'a weapon, or ammunition, forming part of the

fines. equipment of a unit of the Force, is lost or stolen, an officer not below rank of the Commandant
of a battalion may, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit and subject to the rules and
regulations, impose a collective fine upon the subordinate officer, under-officer and men of
such unit, or upon so many of them as, in his judgment, should be held responsible for such
loss or theft.

(2) Such fing shall be assessed as a percentage on the pay of the individuals on whom

it falls,
' CHAPTER VI
PENAL DEDUCTIONS

Deductions 68. The follawing penal deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of an
ior Pa officer, that is to say,—
officers. (a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every day he absents himself

without leave, unless a satisfactory explanation has been given to. his commanding

. oificer and has been approved by the Central Government;

(5) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custady or under
suspension from duty on a charge for an offence for which he is afterwards convicted
by a criminal court or an Assam Rifles Court or by an-officer exercising authority
undér section 64 or section 65; ;

(¢) any sum required to make good the pay of any person subject to this Act
which he has unlawfully retained or unlawfully refused to pay, .

[PAGE 19]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 |
—aee—e———————eeeeeeEeEeEeEeEeEEeEeEeE>E>E>E>EEEESEE i
|
(a) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss,
damage or destruction oceasioned by the commission of an offence as may be determined by an Assam Riles Court by whom he is convieted of such offence or by an
officer exercising authority under section 64 or section 63; |
(w) all pay and allowances ordered by an Assam Rifles Court 10 be forteited or
slopped;
(any sum required to pay a fine awarded by 1 criminal court ar an Assam Rifles
Court,
(g) any sum required to muke good any loss, damage or destruction of public or
regimental property which, after due investigation, appears tothe Central Government
to have been accasioned by the wrongful act or negligence on the part of the officer,
(i) all pay and allowances forfeited by order of the Ceotral Government ifthe
officer is found by a Court of inquiry constituted by the Direvtor-General in this behalf,
to have deseried to the enemy, or while in enemy bands, to have served with, ar under
the orders of, theenemy, or in any manner to have aided the enemy, or to have allowed
himself to be taken prisoner by the enemy through want of due precaution or through
disobedience of orders or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner by the
enemy, to have failed 10 rejoin his service when it was possible to do 50;
(any sum required by order of the Central Government to be paid for the
maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child of towards the cost of any
relief given by the said Government to the said wile or child.
69, Subject to the provisions of section 72, the following penal deductions may be maie Deductions |
i, i , “ nt fiom pay andl
from the pay and allowances of a person subject to this Act other than an officer, that isto oo
aye pervs othey
() all pay and allowances for every day of abseney either on desertion o than officers
without leave, or asa prisoner of war unless 4 sulisfactory explanation has been given
and-accepted by his Commandant, and for every day of imprisonment awarded
by a criminal court, an Assam Rifles Court or an officer exercising authority under
section 62;
(6) alll pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody on a charge foran
offence of which he is-allerwards convicted by a criminal court or an Assam Rifles
Court or on a charge of absence without leave for which he is afterwards awarded
imprisonment by an officer exercising authority under section 62;
(c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he ts in hospital om account af
sickness certified by the medical officer attending an him to have been caused by an
offence under this Act committed by him,
(a) for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness certified by
the medical officer attending on him tw have been caused by his own misconduct oF
imprudence, such sum as may be specified by the order of the Central Government or
such officer as may be specified by that Government,
(e} all pay and allowances ordered by an Assam Rifles Cotert or by ain officer
exercising authority undér any of the sections 62, 64, 65 and 66 to be forfeited or :
stopped;
(fall pay and allowances for every day between his being recovered from the
enemy and his dismissal from the service in consequence of his conduct when being
taken prisoner by, or while in the hands of the enemy,
(g) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss,
dathage or destruction caused by him to the Central Government of to any building ar
property as may be awarded by his Commuandunt,

[PAGE 20]
20) THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY (Pant 1l—
(i) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court, an Assam Rifles
Court or an officer exercising authority under any of the sections 62 and 67; :
(/) any sum required by order of the Central Government or any prescribed '
officer to be paid for the maintenance of his wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or
towards the cost of any relief given by the said Government to the said wife or child.
Conmpatakien 70. For the purpose of clauses (a) and (4) af section 69,— .
ial tae ll
rene wl (a) no person shall be treated as absent or in custody for a day unless the
cuslinly. absence or custody has lasted, whether wholly in one day, or partly in one day and :
partly in another, for six consecutive hours or upwards; :
(6) any absence of custody for less than a day may be reckoned as absence or E
custody fur a day if such absence or custody prevented the absentee from fulfilling :
any duty which wus thereby thrown upon sone other person, 3
(c) absence or custody for twelve consecutive hours or upward inay be reckoned as absence or custody for the whole of each day during any portion of which (he :
person was absent or in custody; . ‘:
(@) a period of absence or imprisonment, which commences before, and ends 5
afier, midnight may be reckoned as a day. jo
Puy und 91. In case of any person subject ta this Act who is in custody or under suspension E
allowances fromduty ona charge for an offence, the pres¢ ribed officer may direct that the whole or any Le
during tl part of the pay and allowances ‘of such person shall be withheld, pending the result of his i
trial on the charge against him, in order (0 give effect to the provisions of clause (b) of e.
section 68 and section 69, :
Limin of 92. The total deductions from the pity and allowances ofa person made under clauses i
aa ; (e}, (g) to (i) of section 69 ghall not, except where he is senlenged to dismissal or removal, p
jsduclivis cond in any ane month one-half of his pay and allowances of that month. pas
[ berbursitesth 73. Any sun authorised by this Act to be deducted from the pay and allowances ol t
front “ae ONY person may, without prejudice 10 any other mode of recovering the sume, be deducted
neuney de . . -
§ penal from any public money due to hint other than a pension, ‘
Pay and 74, Where the conduct of any person subject to this Act when being taken prisoner
allowances af by, oF while in the hands of the enemy, is to be inquired into under this Act or any other law, i
prisoner os the Director-General or any officer authorised by him may order that the whole or any partof :
inquiry NE, the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld pending the result of such inquiry. i
Tues Csvbalteck .
Remission of 75. Any deduction from pay and allowances authorised by this Act may be remitted in :
deductions. gych manner and to such extent and by such authority, as may, from time to tine be pre= }
acribed, :
Provision for * a6, Inthe case of all persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, whose pay anid
, B
dependents oF allowances have been forfeited under clause (0) of section 69, but in respeet of whom a :
erioane uf remission has been made under section 75, it-shall be lawful for proper provision to be made
femilted by the prescribed authorities out oF such pay and ullowances for any dependants of such t
deductions persons, and any such remission shull in that ease be deemed to apply only to the balance '
thereafter remaining of such pay and allowances. i
Provision for 77. tt shall be lawful for proper provision to be made by the prescribed authorities f
dependenle we for any dependants of any person subject lo hig Act who is prisoner of war or is missing. |
Fe pay ONL OF his pay and allowances.
avid albuewnuen-
Parad duriig, 78. For the purposes of sections 7b and 77, a person shall be deemed lo continue to
winch @ porsan he prisoner of war until the conclusion of any inquiry into his conduct such as is referred F
ccm at io in ggetion 74 and if he is dismissed oF removed from the service in consequence of
war, such conduct, until the date of such dismissal or remawal.

[PAGE 21]
Sec.) THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 |
——ooooooooe————————— ——_————————
CHAPTER VII |
ARREST ANDPROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL
79, (J) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may be taken Custody off
into Force custody, under the order of any superior officer. offenders.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in subs-seetion (/), an officer may order into
Force custody any other officer, though such other officer may be of a higher rank, engaged
in a quarrel, aftray or disorder.
80. (J) It shall be the duty of every Commandant to take care that a person under his Duty of
command when charged with an offence is not detained in custody for more than forty-eight Commandant
hours after the committal of such person into custody is reported to him without the charge inom (0
being investigated, unless investigation within that period seems to him to be impracticable |
having regard to the public service,

(2) The case of every person, being detained in custody beyond a period of forty-eight
hours, and reason thereof, shall be reported by the Commandant t the Depuly Inspector-

General under whom he is serving or such other officer to whom an application may be made ;
to convene an Assam Rifles Court for the trial of the person charged. \

(3) In reckoning the period of forty-eight hours specified in sub-section (1), Sundays
and other public holidays shall be excluded.

(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make rules {
providing for the manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act |
may be taken into and detained in Force custody, pending the trial by any competent authority
for any offence committed by him,

81. In cvery case where any such person as is mentioned in section 79 and as nol on — Interval
active duty, remains in such custody for a longer period than cight days, without his trial by between
fan Agsam Rifles Court being ordered to be convened, a special report giving reasons for the comni
delay shall be made by his Commandant in the manner prescribed, and a similar report shall :
be forwarded at intervals of every eight days until an Assam Rifles Court is convened or
such person is released from custody.

$2. Whenever any person subject to this Act who is accused of an offence under this. Arrest by
Act, is within the jurisdiction of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or police civil
officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to Force custody of such person upon autlionilies
receipt ofa written application to that effect signed by his Commandant or an officer authorised by the Commandant in that behalf. .
83. (/) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the Commandant of the unit — Capture of
to which he belongs, shall give information of the desertion to such civil authorities as, inhis deserters.
opinion, may be able to afford assistance towards the capture of the deserter; and such
authorities shall thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in like manneras if he were a person for whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a magistrate
and shall deliver the deserter, when apprehended, into Force custody,
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be
subject to this Act, and to be deserter or to be travelling without authority, and shail bring a
him without delay before the nearest magistrate, to be dealt with according to law. ,
84. (/) When any person subject to this Act has been absent from his duty without — Ingwiry tte
due authority for a period of thirty days, a court of inquiry shall, as soon as practicable, be ee
assembled and such court shall, on oath or affirmation administered in the prescribed without Teawe
manner, inquire respecting the absence of the person, and the deficiency, if any, in the
property of the Government entrusted to his care, or in any arms, ammunition, equipment, .
instruments, clothing or necessaries, and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without
due authority or other sufficient cause, the court shall declare such absence and the period

[PAGE 22]
22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY [Paar Il
thereof and the said deficiency, if'any, and the Commandant of the unit to which the person
belongs shall make a record thereof in the prescribed manner.
(2) If the person declared absent does not afterwards surrender or is not apprehended, he shall, for the purpose of this Act, be deemed to be deserter.
Force Police 85, (/) The Director-General or any prescribed officer may appoint persons (in this
Ofticers. Act referred to as Force Police) for discharging the functions specified in sub-sections
(2) and (3).
(2) The duties of a person appointed under sub-section (/)}, are to take charge of
, persons confined for any offence, to preserve good order and discipline and to prevent
breaches of the same by persons serving in, or attached to, the Force.
a (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 79, a person appointed under
sub-section (/) may, at any time, arrest and detain for trial, any person subject to this
Act who commits, or is charged with, an offence, and may also carry into effect any
punishment to be inflicted in pursuance of a sentence awarded by an Assam Rifles Court
or by an officer exercising authority under section 62 but shall not inflict any punishment
on his own authority:
Provided that no officer shall be arrested or detained otherwise than on the order of
another officer.
CHAPTER VII
: Assam RurLes COURTS :
Kinds of 86. For the purposes of this Act there shall be three kinds of Assam Rifles Courts, that
Assam Ritts jg tg say;—
Courts,
. (a) General Assam Rifles. Courts;
(>) Petty Assam Rifles Courts, and
(c) Summary Assam Rifles Courts.
Power 10 87. A General Assam Rifles Court may be convened by the Central Government or the
convene &. = Dinector-General or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of the Director-
General; General
Assam Rifles : .
Court. *
Power to con- 88. A Petty Assam Rifles Court may be convened by an officer having power to
vene a Petly convene a General Assam Rifles Court or by an officer empowered in this behalf by warrant
Assam Rifles oF any such officer,
Cou,
Contents of 89. A warrant issued under section 87 or section 88 may contain such restrictions,
warrants isswcdl : ne ennrliti ste .
tinder sections PCeTwatlons or conditions as the officer issuing it may think fit.
87 and 88. ;
Composition 90. A General Assam Rifles Court shall consist of not less than five officers, each of
“ General whom has held the post of Assistant Commandant for not less than three whole years and of
Caan whom not fess than four are of a rank not below that of a confirmed Assistant Commandant,
ae Explanation—For the purpose of this section and section 91, “Assistant Commani ~ dant” includes any past of a higher rank and any post declared by the Central Government, by
“notification, to be an equivalent post as also any post higher in rank than the post so declared.
Composition 91. A Petty Assam Rifles Court shall consist of not less than three officers, each of
of a Peity whom has held the post of Assistant Commandant for not less than two whole years.
Assam Rifles :
Cuaurt,
Summary 92. (7) A Summary Assam Rifles Court may be held by the Commandant of any unit of
Assam Rifles the Force and he alone shall constitute the Court,

[PAGE 23]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 f
a |
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be
officers or subordinate officers or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or
affirmed. , .
93.(/) fan Acsam Rifles Court after the commencement ofa trial isreduced below the — Dissolution of
minimum oumber of officers required by this Act, it shall be dissolved, an ae .
Rifles Coun. a
(2) li, on account of the illness of the Law Officer or of the accused before the finding, :
it is impossible to continue the trial, an Assam Rifles Court shail be dissolved,
(3) The officer who convened an Assam Rifles Court may dissolve the same if it
appears to him that the exigencies of the service or necessities of discipline render it impos~
sible ar inexpedient to continue the suid Assam Rifles Court.
(4) Where an Assam Rifles Court is dissolved under this section, the accused may be |
tried again,
94, A General Assam Rifles Court shall have the power to try any person subject to Powe! of
this Act for any offence punishable thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised ‘encra ites
thereby. Count |
95, A Petty Assam Rifles Court shall have power fo Uy any person subject to this Act Power of a
other than an officer or a subordinate officer for any offence made punishable thereunder iy ity Asam
and to pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence af death or imprison- iftes Cour
ment for a term exceeding two years. i
96. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2}, a Summary Assam Rifles Court Power of a
P . Summary
may try any offence punishable under this Act. Se es .
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and reference can, without Cour,
detriment to discipline, be made to the officer empowered W convene a Petty Assam Rifles
Court for the trial of the alleged offender, an officer holding a Summary Assam Rifles Court
shall not try without such reference any offence punishable under any of the sections 21, 24
and 55, or any offence against the officer holding the Court.
(3) A Summary Assam Rifles Court may try any person subject to this Act and under
the command of the officer holding the Court, except an officer or a subordinate officer.
_ (#)A Summary Assam Rifles Court may pass any sentence which may be passed under
this Act except the sentence of death or of imprisonment for a term exceeding the limut
specified in sub-section (5).
(5) The limit referred to in sub-section (4) shall be—
(a) one year, ifthe officer holding the Assam Rifles Court has held either the post
of Commandant or a post declared by the Central Government, by notification, to be
equivalent thereto for a period of not less than three years or halds a post of higher
rank than either of the said posts; and
(2) three months, in any other case,
97. (/) When any person subject to this Act has been acquitted or convicted of an Prohibition
offence by an Assam Rifles Court or by acriminal court or has been dealt with under section of secund |
62 or section 64 orsection 64 or section 66, he shall not be liable to be tried again forthe same '** .
offence by an Assam Rifles Court or dealt with under the said sections,
(2) When any person, subject to this Act has been acquitted or convicted of an
offence by an Assam Rifles Court or has been dealt with under section 42 of section 64 or
section 64 or section 66, he shall not be liable to be tried again by a criminal court for the
same offence or on the same facts. - ,
98, (/) Except as provided by sub-section (2), no trial by an Assam Rifles Court of Period of
any person subject to this Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expiration of himitation tor
a period of three years and such period shall commence— me ,

[PAGE 24]
a4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part [== i
(@) on the date of the affenge; or
(5) where the commission of the oflence was not known to the person aggrieved
by the offence or to the authority competent to initiate action, from the first day on
: which such offence comes to the knowledge of such person or authority, whichever
is earlier; or ~
(c) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, from the first '
day on which the identity of the offender is known to the person aggrieved by the
offence or to the authority competent to initiate action, whichever is earlier:
Provided that in computing any period under this section, the period during which
the proceedings of investigation has been stayed by any court in such offence by injunction or order, the period of the continuance of the injunction er order, the day on which it
was isswed or made; and the day on which it was withdrawn, shall be excluded. *
(2) The pravisions of sub-section (/) shall not apply to a trial for an offence of E
desertion ar for any of the offences mentioned in section 24 or an offence under
(3) la computation of the period of three years under sub-section (/), any lime spent a
by such person in evading arrest after the commission of the offence, shall be excluded,
Thiwl, etc. of 99% (/) Where an offence under this Act had been commined by any person while }
affenter whe subject to this Act and he had ceased to be so subject, he may be taken inta and kept in Force
oto ti custody and tricd and punished for such offence as if he continued to be so subject, ne
met (2) No such person shall be tried for an offence, unless his trial commences within a :
period of three years after he had ceased 10 be subject to this Act; and in computing such f
period, the time during which such person has avoided arrest by absconding or concealing pe
himself or where the institution of the proceeding in respect of the offence has been stayed e
: by an injunction or order, the period of the continuance of the injunction or order, the day on L ‘
which it was issued or made, and the day on which il was withdrawn, shall be excluded;
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall apply to the trial of any such :
person for an offence of desertion or for any of the offences mentioned in section 24 or shall
affect the jurisdiction of a criminal court to try an offence triable by such court as well as by
an Assam Rifles Court. ;
Applicilion 100, (9) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court to
ofthis Act imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during the term of his sentence, though he is
daring teu dismissed from the Force or has otherwise eeased tw be subject to this Act, and he may be as
kept, removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject to this Act. |
(2) When a person subject to this Act is scutenced by an Assam Rifles Court to death, :
this Act shall apply to hin till the sentence is carried oul. i.
Place of ial LOI. Any person subject to this Act who commits any offence against it may be tried
and punished far such offence in any place whatever, ;
Chores 102, When a criminal court and an Assam Rifles Court each have jurisdiction in re- F
Iechyrccn spect of an offence, il shall be in the discretion of the Director-General, or the Inspectar- i
srimival UC oneral or the Deputy Ingpector-General within whose command the accused person is i
aah Asciain . . . . + i
lites Coun, Seeving or such other officer as may be prescribed, to decide before which court proceed ings
» shall be instituted, and, if that officer, decides that they shall be instituted before an Assam :
Rifles Court, to direct that the accused person shall be detained in Poree custody. f
Power of 103. (/) When a criminal court having jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings
criminal court shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged offence, it may, by written notice,
‘dees or fequite the afficer referred to in section 102 at his option, cither 10 deliver over the i
anne offender to the nearest Magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to pust- j
yillmler, pe ag! i
pone proceedings, pending a referenve two the Central Government. :

[PAGE 25]
Sec. 1) * THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 |
ee |
(2) In every stich case the said officer shall either deliver over the offender in com
pliance with the requisition, of shall forthwith refer the question as to the cour ‘before
whicl the proceedings are to be instituted, (or the determination of the Cena! Governrent whose order upon such reference shull be final,
- CHAPTER IX
Puocupake oF Asiam Riruos Coumrs
1M, Abevery General Assum Rifles Court or Petry Assam Rifles Court, the senior Pressing
inemnber shall be the presiding olficer. alfieet
105, Every General Assam Rifles Court shall, and every Petty Assam Kifles Court Law Officer
may, be attended by a Law Chificer, or if'no such officer ts available, an otticer approved by
ihe Chief Law Officer or a Law Officer, |
16. (7) At all trials byw General Assam Rifles Court or by a Petty Assam Rifles Challenges
Court, as soon ay the Court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and members
shall be read over to the accused, who shall thereupon be asked whether be objects 10
being tried by any officer sitting on the court.
(2) li the accused objects to such officer, his objection and alsa the reply thereto of
the officer objected to, shall be heard and recorded, und the remaining officers of the
court shall, in the absence of the chullenged officer, decide om the objection.
(3) Uf the objection is allowed by one-half or more of the votes of the officers
entitled ta wate, the objecthon shall be allowed, and the member objected to shall retire,
and his vacancy may be filled in the prescribed manner, by another officer subject to the |
. same right of the accused to abject.
(4) When no challenge is made, or when a challenge has been made and disallowed,
of the place of every officer successfully challenged has been filled by another officer to
‘whom no objection is made or allowed, the court shall proceed with the trial. ‘
107. () An oath or affirmation in the presetibed manner shall be administered to Gath of
every member of an Assam Rifles Court and to the Law Officer or, ws dhe case may be, the member. Law
officer approved under section 105 before the commencement of the trial. riled
(2) Every person giving evidence before an Assam Rifles Court shall be examined
ier being duly swom ot affirmed in the prescribed form.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall not apply where the wittiess 5 4 ebildl
under twelve years of age und the Assuy Rifles Court is of opinion that though the witness .
understands the duty of speaking the truth, be docs mot understand the muture of an oath or
affirmations
104, (/) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (J), every decison of an Voting by
Assam Rifles Court stall be passed by a majority of votes, and where there is anequalityof members
votes on either the finding of the sentence, the decision shall be in fievour of the accused.
(7) Na sentence of death shall be passed by a General Assam Rifles Court without the
concurrence of at least nwo-thirds of the members of the Court,
(3) lo madters, other than a challenge or the finding or sentence, the presiding officer
shall have a casting wate.
Wf Vere 109. The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 shall, subject to the prowisions of this Act, apply Geseral rule me
to all proceedings before an Assam Rifles Court \o evidence
110, An Assam Rifles Court may take judicial notice of any master within the general Judicul
knowledge of the members as officers of the Force. ical
1H. (1) The convening officer, the presiding officer of an Assam Rifles Court or court Suimuoting
of loqulry or the Law Offiver or, as the ense may be, the officer approwed under section 105 oF ‘oF winneas,

[PAGE 26]
at THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr lI—
the Commandant of the accused person may, by summons under his hand, require the '
attendance, al a lime and place to be mentioned in the sununeons, of any person either to give
evidence or to produce any document or other thing. {
(2) Inthe case of a witness, who is subject to this Act, the summons shall be sent to his F
Commandant and such officer shall serve it upon him aecordingly. i
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to the Magistrate :
within whose jurisdiction he may be, or resides, and such Magistrate shall give effect to the t
summons as ifthe witness were required in the court of such Magistrate. }
Documents 112. (7) Nothing in section 11) shall be deemed to affect the operation af sections 123
exempted and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or to apply to any letter, postcard, telegramorother | of 1872.
peoaustinn document in the custody of the postal or telegraph authorities. }
(2) [fany document in such custody is, in the opinion of any Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Court of Session or High Court, wanted for the purpose of i
any Assam Rifles Court, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph au- i i
thorities, as the case may be, to deliver such document to such person as such Magistrate, i
or Court may direct. 5
(3) [fany such document is, in the opinion of any other Magistrate or of any Commis- pr
sioner of Police or District Superintendent of Police, wanted for any such purpose, he may 3
require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may be, to cause such search to be ‘
made for, and to detain such document pending the orders of any such Chief Judicial ts
Magistrate, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Court of Session or High Court. i
Commission 113, (1) Whenever, in the course of atrial by an Assam Rifles Court, it appears to the é
for ; Court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of justice, and that the
oP wines Wdendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amaunt of delay, expense or ;
: inconvenience which, in the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, such court :
J may address the Chief Law Officer in order that a commission to take the evidence of such ad
witness may be issued, -
(2) The Chief Law Officer may then, if he thinks necessary, issue a commission to any [3
Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of i
whose jurisdiction such witness resides, to lake the evidence of such witness. i
(3) The Chief Judicial Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class to whom the |
commission is issued, or, if he is the Chief Judicial Magistrate, he or such Judicial Magistrate i
ofthe first class as he appoints in this behall, shall summon the witness before him and shall ‘
take down his evidence in lie same manner, and may for this purpose exercise ihe same :
powers, as in the trials of warrant-cases under the Cade of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Loria ©
(4) When the witness resides ina tribal area or in any place outside India, the commis- {
sion may be issued in the manner specified in sub-heading “B.—Commissions for the
examination of witnesses ” of Chapter XXL ofthe Cade of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 of 1974
Examination M4. (1) The prosecutor and the accused person in any case in which a commission is §
of withess on issued under section 113 may respectively forward any interrogatories in writing which the 3
commission. eaurt may think relevant to the issue, and the Chief Judicial Magistrate or the Judicial ;
Magistrate of the first class executing the commission shall examine the witness upon such ¥
interrogatories, 4
F (2), The prosecutor and the wecused person may appear before such Chief Judicial -
Magistrate or the Judicial Magistrate of the first class by counsel or, except in the case of
an accused person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross-examine and re-examine,
as the case may be, the said witness.
(3) After a commission issued under section 113 has been duly executed, it shall be :
returned, together with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder to the Chief Law 7
‘Ollicer. 5

[PAGE 27]
. Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 |
oaaaeqaquooaoaoaoaoauaOa0O0a0=Paooo
(4) On receipt of a commission, and deposition retumed under sub-section (3), the
Chief Law Officer shall forward the same to the court at whose insiance the commission was
issued or, if such court has been dissolved, to any other court convened for the trial of the
accused person and the commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open to !
inspection by the prosecutor and the accused person, and may, subject to all just exceptions,
be read in evidence in the case by either the prosecutor or the accused, and shall form part of
ihe proceedings of the court. 4
(3) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 113, the trial may be
adjourned for specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the commission.
115.4 person charged before an Assam Rifles Courk— Conviction of
it H
(a) with desertion may be found guilty of auempting to desert or of being absent charged. m '
without leave; .
(&) with attempting to desert may be found guilty of being absent without leave;
{e) with using criminal force may be found guilty of assault;
(a) with using threatening language may be found guilty ofusing insubordinate !
language,
(e) with any one of the offences specified in clauses (a), (6), (c) and (a) of section
39 may be found guilty of any other of these offences with which he might have been 1
(9 with an offence punishable under section $3 may be found guilty of any other
offence of which he might have been found guilty, if the provisions of the Code of |
of 1974, Criminal Procedure, 1973, were applicable,
; (2) with any offence under this Act may, on failure of proof of an offence having
been committed in circumstances involving a more severe punishment, be found guilty
of the same offence as having been committed in circumstances involving a less
severe punishment;
(h) with any offence under this Act may be found guiley oflhaving attempted or
abetted the commission of that offence, although the attempt or abetment is not separately charged.
116, In any proceeding under this Act, any application, certificate, warrant, reply or Presumprion
other document purporting to be signed by an officer inthe service of the Government shall, "©
on praduction, be presumed to have been duily signed by the person by whom and in the | “8™!'s
character in which it purports to have been signed, until the contrary is shown.
117. (J) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed by an enrolling officer shall, in Enrolment
proceedings under this Act, be evidence of the person enrolled having given the answers ta Paper
questions which he is therein represented as having given. ;
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or
a copy of this enrolment paper purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer
having custody of enrolment paper,
118. (/) A letter, retum or other document respecting the service of any person in, Presumption .
or the dismissal, removal or discharge of any person from, any unit of the Force, or re~ 38 0 ecrtaie
specting the circumstances of any person not having served in, or belonged to any unit of Socuments,
the Force, if purporting to be signed by or on behalf of the Central Government or the
Director-General, or by any prescribed officer, shall be the evidence of facts stated in j
such lever, retum or other document, ;
(2) An Assam Rifles list or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be i
evidence of the status and rank of the officers, subordinate officers therein mentioned, and

[PAGE 28]
28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr Il—
, of any appointment held by them and of the battalion, unit or branch of the Force to which
they belong.
(3) Where a record is made in any battalion book in pursuance of this Act or of any
rules or otherwise in the discharge of official duties, and purporting to be signed by the
Commandant or bythe officer whase duty it is to make such record, such record shall be
evidence of the facts therein staled,
(4) Acopy of any record in any battalion book purporting to be certified to be a true :
copy by the officer having custody of such book shall be evidence of such record,
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tied on a charge of desertion or of :
absence without leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of any E
officer or other person subject to this Act, or any unit of the Force, ar has been apprehended F
by such officer or person, a certilicate purporting, to be signed by such officer or by the
Commandant of the unit to which such person belongs, as the case may be, and stating the
fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension, and the manner in which he was }
dressed, shall be the evidence of the matters so stated. :
(6) Where any person subject to this Act ts being tried on a charge of desertion or of 5
absence without leave and such person has surrendered himself inta the custody of, or has i
been apprehended by, a police officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police F
station, a certificate purporting to be signed by such police officer and stating facts, the date
and place of such surrender or apprehension, and the manner in which he was dressed shall
be evidence of the matters so stated,
(7) Any document purporting to be the report under the hand of a Government scien- i
tific expert, upon any matter ar thing duly submitted to him for examination or analysis and
report in the course of any proceeding under this Act, may be used as evidence in any P
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Act.
(8) The Assam Rifles Court may, if itthinks fit, summon and examine the expert referred fee
to in sub-section (7)as to the subject matter of his report. ‘
(9) Where any such expert is summoned by an Assam Rifles Court and he is unable to ; f
attend personally, he may, unless the Court has expressly directed him ta appear personally,
depute any responsible officer working wilh him to attend the Court, ifsuch deputed officer
is conversant with the facts of the case and satisfactorily depose in the Court on his behalf.
(/0) The provisions of sub-sections (7), (8) and (9) shall apply to such Government '
scientific experts as specified in sub-section (4) of section 293 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973. tof 9M.
Reference by 119, (/} [fat any trial for desertion or absence without leave, overstaying leave or not
accused to rejoining when warned far service, the accused person states in his defence any sufficient or i
Government reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers in support thereof to any officer :
, in the service of the Government, or if it appears that any such officer is likely to prove or
disprove the said statement in the defence, the Court shall address such officer and adjourn
the proceedings until his reply is received. i
. (2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall, if signed by him, be received in
evidence and have the same effect as if made on oath before the Court.
(3) If the Court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply or if the Court omits to
. comply with the provisions of this section, the convening officer may, at his discretion, i
annul the proceedings and order a fresh trial. |
Evidence of 120. (/) When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by an Assam Rifles
previous Court of any offence, such Assam Rifles Court may inquire into, and receive, and record
convictions . . . oe . a
im! pent —evidenée of any previous convictions of such person, either by an Assam Rifles Court or by
churucter. a criminal court, or any previous award of punishment under section 62 or section 64 or

[PAGE 29]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 24 |
a |
section 65 or section 66, and may further inquire into and record the general character of such

person and such other matters aa may be prescribed,

(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of i
entries in, or certified extracts from, books of an Assam Rifles Court, or other official records;
and it shall not be necessary to give notice before trial to the person tried that evidence as to
his previous convictions or character will be received. :

(3) Ata Summary Assam Rifles Court, the officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit, :
record any previous convictions against the offender, his general character, and such other
matters as may be prescribed, as of his own knowledge, instead of requiring them to be
proved under the foregoing provisions of this section.

121, (/) Whenever, in the course ofa trial by an Assam Rifles Court, itappears wo the Lunacy af j
Court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable af making his uscused !
defence, or that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind
incapable of knowing the nature of the act or knowing that it was wrong or Contrary to Law,
the Court shall record a finding accordingly.

(2) The presiding officer of the Court, or in the case of a Summary Assam Rifles Court, the
officer holding the trial, shall forthwith report the case to the confirming officer, or to the 1
authority empowered to deal with its findinys under section 137, as the case may be.

(3) The confirming officer to whom the case is reported under sub-section (2) may, ifhe :
does not confirm the finding, take steps to have the accused person tried by the same or
another Assam Rifles Court for the offence with which he was charged. . i

(4) The authority to whom the finding of a Summary Assam Rifles Court is reported !
under sub-section (2), and a confirming officer confirming the finding in any case so i

reported to him shall order the accused person to be kept in custody in the prescribed
manner and shall report the case for the orders of the Central Government.
(3) On receipt of'a report under sub-section (4), the Central Government may order the
accused person to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.
122. Where any accused person, having been found by reason of unsoundness of Subsequent
mind to be incapable of making his defence, is in custody or under detention under section fines of
21, any offi ribed in this behalf, may, — hea
121, any officer prese , May, accused for
(a) if such person is in custody under sub-section (4) of section 121, on the taal.
report of a medical officer that he is capable of making his defence, or
(6) ifsuch person is detained in a jail under sub-section (5) of section 121 on a
certificate of the Inspector-General of Prisons, and if such person is detained in a
lunatic asylum under the said sub-section, on a certificate of any two or more of the
visitors of such asylurn and if he is detained in any other place under that sub-section,
on a certificate of the prescribed authority, that he is capable of making his defence,
take steps to have such person tried by the same or another Assam Rifles Court for the :
offence with which he was originally charged or, if the offence is acivil offence, by a criminal
eourt.
123. A copy of every order made by an officer under section 122 for the trial of the Trangmission .
accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central Government, tw Central .
Government
af orders
under secon
124. Where any person is in custody under sub-section (4) of section 121 oF under — Kelease of
detention under sub-section (5) of that section,— lunatic 1
accused, H
(a) if' such person is in custody under the said sub-section (), on the report of
amedical officer, or

[PAGE 30]
30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAOKDINARY [Part I
(6) ifsuch person is detained under the said sub-section (5), on a certificate fram “
any of the authorities mentioned in clause (4) of section 122 that in the judgment of
such officer or aulhority such person may be released without danger of his doing
injury to himself or to any other person,
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody, or :
transferred to a public lunatic asylum if he has not already been to such an asylum,
Delivery of 125. Where any relative or friend of any person who is in custody under sub-section E
Junatic (4) of section 121 or under detention under sub-section (5) of that section desires that he
ssined fa should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may, upon application i
by such relative or friend and, on his giving security to the satisfaction of thal Government
that the person delivered shall be properly taken care of, and, prevented from doing injury to
himself or to any other person, and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at ;
such times and places, as the Central Government may direct, order such person to be
delivered to such relative or friend, '
Order for 126. When any property regarding which any offence appears to have been commitcubdy and ted, or which appears to have been used for the commission of any offence, is produced : :
propery, beforean Assam Rifles Court during a trial, the Court may make such order as it thinks fit for ;
pedding tial, the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and if the property t
is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as it thinks neces- ;
sary, order it to be sold otherwise disposed af. E
Onder of 127. (1) After the conclusion of atrial before any Assam Rifles Court, the Court or the F
disposal of officer confirming the finding or sentence of such Assam Rifles Court, or any authority
propel superior to such oificer, or, in the case of Summary Assam Rifles Court whose finding or
wre offence sentence does not require confirmation, an officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector- :
is committed. General within whose command the trial was held, may make such order as it or he thinks fit 5
for the disposal by destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to be entitled '
, to possession thereof, ar otherwise, of any property or document produced before the Court ee
‘or in its custody, of regarding which any offence appears to have been committed or which ‘
has been committed or which has been used for the commission of any offence. i
(2) Where any order has been made under sub-section (/) in respect of propery
regarding which an offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed
and certified by the authority making the same may, whether the trial was held within India or
not, be sent to a Magistrate within whose jurisdiction such property for the time being is ,
situated, and such Magistrate shall thereupon cause the order to be carried into effect as if
it were an order passed by him under the provisions ol the Code af Criminal Procedure, 1973, Daf 194
(3) In this section, the term “property” includes, in the case of property regarding
which an offence appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been i
originally in the possession or under the control of any person, but also any property into or
for which the same may have been converted or exchanged, and anything acquired by such
conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.
Powers of 128. Any trial by an Assam Rifles Court under the provisions of the Act shall be '
Asam Rifles deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and 228 of the Indian
Cour it Penal Code and the Assam Rifles Court shall be deemed to be the Court within the.mean- 45 of 1860.
procecdings tg Of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 2 of 1974.
under this 5
CHAPTER X
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION
Finding and 129. No finding or sentence of a General Assam Rifles Court or a Petty Assam
sentence not Rifles Court shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed as provided by this Act.
valid anless
confirmed.

[PAGE 31]
Suc, 1] "THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 |
ee —
130, The findings and sentences of General Assam Rifles Courts may be confirmed by — Power to
the Central Government or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant ofthe Central Sonfiera
Government. finding and
sentence of
. General
Assan Rufles
Court.
131, The findings and sentences of Petty Assam Rifles Courts may be confirmed by an Power to ‘
officer having power ta convenea General Assam Rifles Courtor by any officer empowered — confirm
in this behalf by warrant of such officer. finding and
sentence of
Peny Assam
Riles Cours.
132. A warrant issued under section 130 or section 131 may contain such restrictions, Limitetien af i
reservations or conditions as the authority issuing it may think fit. powers of
continuing
sutluorily.
133, Subject to such restrictions, reservations or conditions, as may be contained in power of
any warrant issued under seetion 130 or section 131, a confirming authority may, when — ostirming
confirming the sentence of an Assam Rifles Court, mitigate or remit the punishment thereby auatity to
awarded, or commute that punishment for any punishment or punishment lower in the scale eeu
laid down in section 57. commute
senlences,
134, When any person subject to this Act is tried and sentenced by an Assam Rifles Confirming
Court while on board a ship, the finding and sentence so far as not confirmed and executed ot pmaings ;
onboard the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such person had been us Seen
tried at the port of disembarkation. ship.
135. (/) Any finding or sentence of'an Assam Rifles Court which requires confirmation Revision of
may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the Court, if "nding or
so directed by the confirming authority, may take additional evidence, sentence.
(2) The Court, on revision, shall consist of the same officers az were present when the
original decision was passed unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof’ shall be duly certified in the
proceedings, and the Court shall proceed with the revision:
Provided that, if'a General Assam Rifles Court, still consists of five officers, or, ifa Petty
Assam Rifles Court, of three officers.
136. (f) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the finding and sentence of a Finding and
Summary Assam Rifles Court shall not require to be confirmed, but may be carried gut senlense of
forthwith . Summit
~ Assam Rafles
(2) If the officer holding the tial is of the rank of Deputy Commandant or ofa rank | ©"
declared under clause (a) of sub-section (5) of section 96 as equivalent thereto or afa lower
rank and has held such rank for less than five years, he shall nat, except on active duty, carry
into effect any sentence, until it has received the approval of an officer not below the rank 1
of a Deputy Inspector-General,
137. The proceedings of every Summary Assam Rifles Court shall, without delay, be Transmission
forwarded to the officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector-General within whose af proceedings
command the trial was held, or to the prescribed officer, and such officer or the Director- on
General or any officer empowered by him in this behalf may, for reasons based on the merits Court,
of the case, but not on merely technical grounds, set aside the procecdings, or reduce the :
sentence to any other sentence which the court might have passed, |

[PAGE 32]
*
32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr Il—
Alicration of 138, (/) Where a finding of guilty by an Assam Rifles Court, which has been confirmed
ea of which does not require confirmation, is found for any reason to be invalid or cannot be
ciate supported by the evidence, the authority which would have had power under section | 30 to
commute the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the finding had been valid may
substitute a new finding and pasé a sentence for the offence specified or involved in such
finding: ~ ‘
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such finding could have been
validly made by the Assam Rifles Court on the charge and unless il appears that the Assam
Rifles Court must have been satisfied of the facts establishing the said offence.
(2) Where a sentence passed by an Assam Rifles Court which has been confirmed, or
which does not require confirmation, not being a sentence passed in pursuance of anew
finding substituted under sub-section (/) is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority t
referred to in sub-section (/) may passa valid sentence
(3) The punishment awarded by # sentence passed under sub-seelion (J) or subsection (2) shall nat be higher in the scale of punishment than, or in excess af, the punish- E
ment awarded by, the sentence for which a new sentence is substituted under this section
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence passed, under this section shall, for the :
purpose of Unis Act and the rules, have effect as if it were a finding er sentence, as the case
may be, of an Assam Rifles Court, E
Kemnely 139, (/) Any person subject wo this Act who considers himself aggrieved by any order I
aguinst wider. passed by any Assam Rifles Caurt may present a petition to the officer or authority empowered ;
fle ee to confirm any finding or sentence of the Assam Rifles Court and the canfirming authority
‘Awam Pole, © May take such steps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as to the correctiiess, F
Conti, legality or propriety of the order pussed or as to the regularity of any proceeding ta which the
order relates.
(2) Any person subject t0 this Act who conuiders himself aggrieved by a finding or <
sentence of any Assam Rifles Count which has been confirmed may present a petition to the
Central Government, the Director-General or any prescribed officer superior in command to
the one who confirrwed such finding or sentence, and the Central Government, the Director-
General or the preseribed officer, as the case may be, may pass such order thereon as it ar he
thinks fil.
Annulment of 140, The Central Government, the Director-General or any prescribed officer may
proceedings annul the proceeding of any Assam Rifles Court on the ground that they are illegal or unjust.
CHAPTER XI
EX2CUTION OF SENTENCE PARDON, REMISSION, Fre
Form of 141. In awarding a sentence of death, an Assam Rifles Court shall in its discretion
semence of direct that the offender-shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he bo dead, oF :
eal shall suffer death by being shot to death,
(Commencement 142, Whenever any person is semenced by an Assaru Rifles Court under this Act to
of sentence of jmprisanment, the term of his sentence shall, whether ithas been revised oF not, be reckoned
imprisonment. i commence on the day in which the original proceedings were signed by the presiding
officer, or in the case of a Summary Assam Rifles Court, by the Court
Provided that when a person subject to this Act is sentenced by an Assam Rifles
© Court te 4 term of imprisonment, not being an imprisonment in default of payment of fine,
the period spent by him in civil or Force custody during investigation, inquiry of trial of
the same case, and before the date of order, such sentence shall be set off against the term
of imprisonment imposed upon him and the liability of such person or officer to undergo
imprisoninent on such order af sentence shall be restricted to the remainder, if any, of the
term of imprisonment imposed upon him.

[PAGE 33]
Sec.) THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY EF
ooonaouQuQuwuwuwOOOooaESEEEEEeE—EE—EEee |

143, (7) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is passed under this Act by am Exeeutiva of
Assam Rifles Court or whenever any sentence of deuth is commuted to imprisonment, the “alte of
canfirming officer or in case ofa Summary Assain Rifles Court, the officer holding the Court "FNS"
of such other officer as may be prescribed, shall, save as otherwise provided in sub-sections
(3) and (v7), direct that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a civil prison,

(2) When a direction has been made under sub-section (/), the Commandant of the
person under sentence or such other officer es may be prescribed shall forward 4 warrant in
the prescribed form to the officer in charge of the prison in which such person is to be
confined and shall arrange for his despatch to such prison with the warrant,

(3) in the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months
and passed under this Act by an Assam Rifles Court the appropriate officer under subsection (!) may direct that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in force custody
instead of ina civil prison. |

(4) On active duty, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in
such place aa the Deputy Inspector-General within whose command the person sentenced is
serving a any prescribed officer may from Lime ty thee uppouu.

144, Where a sentence of imprisonment is directed to be undergone in a civil prisun, — Temparaty
the offender may be kept in Force custody or in any other fit place till such time as it bs cuatty of 5
possible to send him to a civil prison. rientet,

145. Whenever, in the opinion of an officer not below the rank of Deputy Inspector- Execution of
General within whose command the trial is held, any sentence or portion of a sentence of | emlenee of
imprisonment cannot for special reasons, conveniently be carried out int Force custody in deat
accordance with the provisions of section 143, such officer may direct that such sentence or cases |
portion of sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any civil prisan or other fit place

146. A person under sentence of imprisonment may, during his conveyance from place — Conveyance
to place, or when on board ship, wirerafi or otherwise, be subjected to such restraint as is of prisoner
necessary for his safe conduct and remowal, twa id

147, When an order is duly made under this Act setting sside of varying any senienee, — Communecas
order or warrant under which any person is confined ina civil prison, a warrant inaccordance a8 8
with such oder shall be forwarded by the officer making the order or his stafFafficer or such ee
other person as may be prescribed, tothe officer in charge off the prison in which such person yiticers
is confined.

148, When a sentence of fine is imposed by an Assam Rifles Court under section $5, Esseation of
u copy of such sentence signed and certified by the confirming officer, or whereno confirma sealens< af
tion is required by the: officer holding the trial may be sent to any Magistrate in India and i
such Magistrate shall thereupon cause the fie to be recovered in accordance with the

dof 1974 provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as if it were a sentence of fine imposed by
such Magistrate.

149. Whenever any person is sentenced to imprisonment under this Act and is Infurmatity
undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in which he might be confined under a es
lawful order of warrant in pursuance of this Act, the confinement of such person shall net be rahul
deemed to be illegal only by reason of informality or error in, of as respects the order,
warrant or other document, of the authority by which, of in pursuance whereof! such person '
was brought into, or is confined in any such place, and any such onder, warrant or document
may be amended accordingly.

150. When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by an Assam Rifles ardoa and
Court of any offence, the Central Government or the Director-General, or in the case of a seanssiue
sentence which he could have confirmed or which did not require confirmation, an officer nat
below the rank of Deputy Inspector-Genemu! within whose command such person at the time
of conviction was serving or the prescribed officer may,—

[PAGE 34]
34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Paur
EEE ——e—eEeE_—TTT TE °
. (a) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts,
pardon the person or remit the whole or any part of the punishment awarded; or .
(6) mitigate the punishment awarded; or :
(ec) commute such punishment for any less punishment or punishments :
mentioned inthis Act; or
(a) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts,
release the person on parole,
Cancellation 151. (/) lfany condition on which a person has been pardoned or released on parole :
of conditional gp a punishment has been remitted is, in the opinion of the authority which granted the z
pardon, pardon, release or remission, not fulfilled, such authority may cancel the pardon, release or i
release on ee . : {
parole or remission, and thereupon the sentence of the Court shall be carried into effect as if such ;
remission. pardon, release or remission had not been granted. . {
(2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is carried into effect under the E :
provisions of sub-seetion (/) shall undergo only the unexpired portion of his sentence. i
Suspension af 152, (/) Where a person subject to this Act is sentenced by an Assam Rifles Court wo H
sentence of} imprisanment, the Central Government, the Director-Cieneral or any officer empowered to fi
Imprisonment eomvene a General Assam Rifles Court may suspend the sentence whether or not the é
offender has already been committed to prison or to Foree custody.
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub-section (/) may, in the case of an offender
©. so Sentenced direct that until the order af such authority or officer have been obtained, the 5
a > offender shall not be committed to prison or to Force custody, ;
_ (3) The powers conferred by sub-sections (/) and (2) may be exercised in the case of i
any such sentence which has been confirmed, reduced or commuted, S
Ordera! ts : 153, (/) Where sentence referred to in section 152 is imposed by an Assam Rifles 2
pending’ ~~ Court other than Summary Assam Rifles Court, the confirming officer may, when confirming ef
suspension. "the sentence, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to Force custody watil
’ the orders of the authority or officer specified in section 152 have been obtained. :
oo (2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed by a Summary Assam Rifles Court,
the officer holding the trial or the officer authorised to approve the sentence under
sub-section (2) of section 136 may make the direction referred to in sub-section (/).
Release on 154. Where a sentence is suspended under section 152 the offender shall forthwith be
suspension released from custody.
Computat ion 155. Any period during which the sentence is under suspension shall be reckoned as :
of period o 5
Suspension, Pat of the term of such sentence. E
Order after 156. The authority or officer specified in section 152 may, at any time while a sentence by
SUEpeNSion. is suspended, order— -
(a) that the offender be commited to undergo the unexpired portion of the ;
7 sentence; or : .
: (6) that the sentence be remitied. .
Reconsideration 157, (J) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case may at any time, and shall at i
of case after iqtervals of not more than fowr months, be reconsidered by the authority or officer specified
Suspension. in section 152 or by any officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector-General duly ‘4
~*~ authorised by the authority or officer specified in section 152. : |
(2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer so authorised it appears to him that
the conduct of offender since his conviction has been such as to justily a remission of the
sentence, he shall refer the matter to the authority or officer specified in section, 150. .

[PAGE 35]
sec. 1) THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 |
158, Where an offender, while a sentence on hin is suspended under this Act, is Freeh
sentenced for any other offence, then,— “ee
aftce
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under thes Act, the two semences «suspension
shall new concurrently;
(6) if the further sentence is for a period of three months or more and is no
suspended under this Act, the offender shall be 50 committed to prison or to Fores
custody for the unexpired portion of the previous sentence, but both sentences shall
run concurrently, and
(c) ifthe further sentence is foro period of less than three monihs and is not
suspended under this Act, the offender shall be so committed on that sentence only,
and the previous sentence shall, subject to any order which may be passed under
section [56 or section 157, continue to be suspended. |
159, The powers conferred by sections 152 and 156 shall be in addition to, und not in Scope of
derogation of, the pawer of mitigation, remission and commutation. power of
auspenstuatt
160. (2) Where in addition to any other sentence the punishment of dismissal or #tTect of
removal has been awarded by an Assam Rifles Court, and such sentence ts suspended under ae catia
section 152, then, such dismissal or removal shall not take effect until so gederod-by the, SY yeieat
authority or officer specified in section 152.
(2) such other sentence is remitted under section 146, the punishment of dismissal or
removal shall alsa be ternitted
CHAPTER XII
MisCELLANEGUS
161, The Central Government or any other authority’ empowered in this bchalf by that Dispaial of
Government may, by a general or special order, make provisions for the disposal of the eee
private of regimental property of any person subject to this Actor any other dues including ur eee
provident fund of thut person, who dies or deserts, or is ascertained tu be of unsound mind
or while on active duty is officially reported as missing.
162, ()) The Central Government may, by general or special order publ ished in the Powers and
Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such conditions and lisitstions, and within the focal ee
limits of such area adjoining the border of india, as may be specified in the order, any member pitt jieaisabbe
ofthe Foree may.— un mernbers
‘ of the Force.
4 to 1920 (a) for the purpose of prevention of any offence punishable under the Passport
if at 1999 (Entry into India) Act, 1920, the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1929, the Central Excise .
Taha Act, 1944, the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Customs Act, 1962, the Passports Act, 1967 or
52 of 1962 the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 or of any cognizable offence punishable
18 at L967 under any other Central Act, or
42 af 1999.
(b) for the purpose of apprehending any person who has committed any offence
referred to in clause (a),
exercise or discharne auch af the powers or duties under that Act of any other Central Act
as may be specified in the said order, being the powers und duties which, tn the opinion of
the Central Government, an officer of the corresponding oF lower rank is by that or such
other Act empowered to exercise or discharge for the said purposes.
(2) The Central Government may, by general ‘or special order published in the Offi.
cial Gazette, confer or impose, with the concurrence of the Stave Government concemed,
any of the powers or duties which may be exercised or discharged under a State Act by a
police officer upon a member of the Force who, an the opinion of the Central Government,
holds a corresponding or higher cank. |

[PAGE 36]
36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Paar l—

(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as maybe after it is
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty
days which may be comprised in ane session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses apree in making uny modificution in the order or both
Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter tue effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, thal any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that order.

Protection 163, (!) The provision of section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act, [872 shall apply 1 of 1872

for acs of tg such members of the Force who exercise or discharge any power or duty under sub-

acpi section (/) of section 162 or on whom any power is conferred or duty is imposed under
sub-section (2) of that section in the same manner as it apply to a palice officer.

(2) In any suit or proceeding ayainst any member of the Force for any act done by
him in pursuance of a warrant or order of a competent authority, it shall be lawful for him
to plead, that sueh act was done by him under the authority of such warrant or order.

(4) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrant ar order directing
the act, and if it is so proved the member of the Force shall thereupon be discharged from

: liability in respect af the act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction
of the authority which issued such warrant or order,

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
any legal proceeding (whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any
member of the Force for anything done or intended to be dane under the powers conferred
by, or in pursuance of, any provision of this Act or the rules, shall be commenced within three
months afterthe act complained of was committed and nat otherwise, and notice in writing of
such proceedings and of the cause thereof shall be given to the defendant or his superior
officer at least one month before the commencement of such proceedings.

Power of 164. (1) [any difficulty arises in giving effect ta the provisions of this Act, the Central
le Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconaoeeve sistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the
difficulties, difficulty:

Provided that no order shall be made uuder this section alter the expiry of two years
from the commencement of this Act.

(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be afler it is made, be loid
before each House of Parliament.

Power to 165, (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules fur the purposes of
make rules carrying out the prowisions of this Act.

(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for—

(a) the manner of re-constitution of the Fores and the conditions of service of

the members of the Force under sub-section (2) of section 4;

(6) the mode of enrolment and the procedure for enrolment under sub-section

()) of section 6;

' (c) the authority whose previous permission in writing is required for resigning

from appointment or withdrawing from all or any of the duties under section 8;

(@) rank or ranks of an officer or a subordinale officer referred to under sub-

section (2) of section (1;

te) the authority who shall give previous sanction in writing under sub-section
(J) of section 13;

[PAGE 37]
Sec. 1] "THE GAZETTE OF INDLA EXTRAORDINARY VW
(A) nature of communication or publication under clause {e) of sub-section (/)of
section 13; :
(g) other purposes of meeting or demonstration under sub-section (2) of
section 13;
(Al form of enrolment under section 31;
() any other purpose under clause (A) of sub-section (J) of section 57,
tt) the officer who may direct that an enrolled person who has been sentenced 1
dismissal or imprisonment whether combined with dismissal er not may be retained
to serve in the ranks under section 60;
(&) the manner of proceedings against 4 person and the extent of awarding
punishment under section 62; |
(ithe manner of proceeding against an officer below the rank of a Deputy
Commandant and of the rank of subordinate officer and of the rank of Warrant
Officer under sub-section (1) of section 64,
(n) the manner of forwarding certified true copies of the proceedings und the
superior authority to whom such copies shall be forwarded under sub-section (2) af
section 64;
(nm) the manner of proceeding against an officer belaw the rank af Commandant and of any rank of subordinate officer and of the rank of Warrant Officer under |
sub-section (7) of section 65; |
(o) the manner of proceeding against any subordinate officer or a Warrant i
Officer under section 66; t
(p) the officer by whose order any sum is required to be paid, for the
maintenance of wile or legitimate or illegitimate child of a person subject to this
Act other than an officer, under clause (/) of section 69
(g) the officer who may direct that the whole or any part of the pay and
allowances of person subject to this Act shall he withheld under section 71;
(F) the manner and the extent of remission of deductions from pay and
allowances authorised by this Act and the authority by which such remission shall be
made under section 73;
() the authorities by whom proper provision to be made out of the pay and
allowances of all persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, for the
dependents of such persons under section 76;
(0) the authorities wha shall make proper provision oul of the pay and
allowances of any person subject to this Act, who is prisoner of war or is missing,
under section 77;
(w) the manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act
may be taken into and detained in Force custody under sub-section (4) of section 40;
(vy) the manner of making special report giving reasons for delay under
section 81;
(w) the authority to appoint, and the manner of appoinunent of, a court of
inquiry; the manner of administering oath or affirmation by such court of inquiry and
the manner of making record under sub-section (/) of section 84;
(x) the officer who may appoint Force Police under sub-section (/) of
section 85; .
(y) the other officer having the discretion Ww decide before which court the
proceeding shall be inutituted under section 112,

[PAGE 38]
38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Pant I—
(2) the manner of filling up the vacancy of member by another officer under
sub-section (3) of section 106:
(ca) the manner for administering oath or affirmation to every mamber of ait !
Assam Rifles Court and to the Law Officer, or, as the case may be, the officer approved
lander section 105 before the commencement of the trial, under sub-section (/) af
section 107,
(26) the form for being duly sworn or affirmed under sub-section (2) of
section 107;
(2c) the oiticer by whom the letter, rewm or other documents purported to be
signed shall be the evidence of the fucts stated in such letter, retum or other document
under sub-section (/) of section 118; . j
. (za) the other mutters to be further inquired and recorded under sub-section (/) :
ofsection 120; =
(ze) the other matters to be recorded under sub-section (J) of section 120;
(othe manner of keeping in custody of the accused person ander sub-section
(4) of section 121;
(zg) the officer who may take steps 1o have certain persons tried under
section 122;
(2h) the authority for issuing certificace in case of detention in uny other place
under clause () of section 122,
(2/) the officer to whom the proceedings of every Summary Assam Rifbes Courts
shall be forwarded under section 137;
(zy) the officer superior bi command, ta the one who confirmed the findings or
sentence feterred to in sub-section (7) of section 139, wo whom petition may be presented under that sub-section;
(28) the officer who may annul the proceeding of any Assam Rifles Count under
sechon 140; 1
{2i) the other officer who shall direct that sentence shall be carried out by the 4
confinement ina civil prison under sub-section (/) of section 143;
i
(cer) the officer who shall forward a warrant and the form af such warrant under }
sub-section (2) section 143;
{er} the officer whe may from time to time appaint the place of confinement
under sub-seetion (¥) af section 143;
(zo) the other person by whom the warrant shall be forwarded to the officer in
charge of the prison under section 147;
(zp) the officer who may pardon or exercise other powers as specified under 7
clauses (a) to (¢) of section 150,
(2y) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of
which provision is to be, or may be, made by rules.
Power to 166. The Director-General may make regulations for all or any of the purposes of
Satine _ this Act other than those apecified in section 165, subject to approval of the Centraal
Goverment,
Ntues ant 167. Every rule or regulation made under this Act hull be laid, as. soon as may be after
anne ea: it ikmade, belore each House of Parliament, while itis in session fora total period of thirty |
Male days whictimay be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, q
befiore the expiry af the session immediately following the session, or the successive sessions

[PAGE 39]
co OSEAN {HE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ”
1 4 aoresaid, bath Houses agree in aking any rodeo 1 rule of regulation or but
ars oe i elton ould tbe made he ul ck TENN
oe thereafter have effect only i" aararvoaiied form or be af no eft, as the ease ray Us, Wy
a however, that any such modification of annulment hall be withunst prejudice tothe validity
| ae of anytbing previously done under that rule or tegulation,
ve 168, (J) The Assam Rifles Act, 14 is hereby repented ea
(2) Notwithstanding nuch repeal,—
(a) the Assan Rifles in exintgnce at the commencement of this Act and
con Ac ao rpened shal be desi be eesti onde
Act,
= (b) members of the Assam Rifles inexistence uf the commencement of this Ast
if ; st hats he At 0 epee al deed have bce appl
ead se the case may be, enrotled as suck under tis ASK,
, {ec} any appeal, upplications, tink, meulry oF investigation pending immediately
ie lan ere ef his Act shale disposed of, coatiued PENSE
; af 94 beth conn ce wt rinse Asami As 1941S
4 this Act bad pot come into force,
| (if) any thing done or wety acten taken before the commencement af this ACK i
4 way epic of ai, ale Yl an ate low
‘ such thing a8 avtion aeritone or taken under the corresponding peevisiont oll this |
Bei ee
| + Seey to the Govt. of ticle
F
\ <a wr URI, crmaNnT oF NOI Ta, mae, OMS RN
il r Hy Te TIE CONTMOLLER OF PBLACATRONS, OF 20S ri
| aciP MANES 1SIGISS 7-11-2006.
—_— - |
—