[PAGE 1]
i ~~ ]
i p |
. Aad». T. |
é ws STATUTES AND RULES RELATING TO THE AWARDS OF BHARAT RATNA, '
; . io PADMA VIBHUSHAN, PADMA BHUSHAN AND PADMA SHRI. i
The following is @ reprint of Notification Nos. 1-Pres.]55, 2-Pres{55, 3-Pres{55 and 4-Pres|55, dated
i 8th January, 1955, as amended upto Ist January, 1969.
OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY TO THE . 3. ‘The decoratiom shall be awarded for excep-
: PRESIDENT. tional service towards the advancement. of Act,
: . Literature and $cience, and in recognition of public
; NOTIFICATION service of the Highest order.
: New Delhi, the 8th January, 1955. 6. -Any person without distinction of race, :
7 occupation, position or sex shall be eligible for the
: No, 1-Pres./55—The President is pleased to make owank ™ P 8
: the following revised regulations for the award of 1 4
i the decoration BHARAT RATNA. in supersession ssously The decoration may be awarded posthu-
E of those published in Notification No. 1-Pres./54, mously. ‘
: dated the 2nd January, ‘1954:— 8. The names of the persons, upon whom the
‘ , decoration js conferred, shall be published in the
i 1, The decoration shal! be conferred by the Gazette of India and a register of all such recipients
: President by a Sanad under his harid and seal. shall be maintained under the direction of the
: : President,

2. The decoration shall be im the form of a tiem co vehi
: Peepul leaf, two and five-sixteenth inches in length, be ae The a tad ng of the decoration pnich ihe
. one and seven-eighth inches at its greatest breadth ma on certain occasions by recipients shalt be
: and one-eighth of an inch in thickness. It shall be halt the wee the BHARAT RATNA, and a sealed
. of toned. jbronze. On its obverse shall be embossed ve =m of the said miniature shall be deposited and
4 a replica of the Sun five-cighths of an inch in diameter ep.
' with rays spreading out from five-sixteenths. of an 10. The President may cancel and annul the
: inch to half an inch from the centre of the Sun, award of the decoration to any person and thereupon
: below which shali be embossed the words BHARAT his name shall be erased from: the Register and he
j RATNA in Hindi. On the ieverse shall be shall be required to surrendér the decoration and
i embossed the State Emblem and motto in Hindi, the Sanad. But it shall be competent for the
i The Erablem (but not the motto), the Sum and the President to restore the decoration and Sanad and
i rim shall be of platinum. The inscriptions shall be . to withdraw the orders of cancellation and annulment.
of @burnished bronze. . . . The notice of cancellation or restoration in every
\ . ( case shall be published in the Gazette of India,
i ttern of the decoration (manu- . :
| , 3 A sealed pa mann ‘ 11. Al persons‘ upon whom the decoration
I tactaced aeeonding to the specications deserted BHARAT RATNA was conferred under the ‘Regula-
. above and ne m he de a 4 ie Det. tions issued with Notification No. 1-Pres/54, dated
: regulations) @ deposited and Kept. the 2nd January, 1954, shall, for-all purposes of these

4. The decoration shall be worn round the Regulations, be deemed tobe persons on whom the
: neck by a white riband %one and a half inches in decoration BHARAT RATNA. has been conferred
: width. by the President.
: ANNEXORE . .
BHARAT RATNA
‘ Obverse Reverse
i
i
I

[PAGE 2]
: i
: No, 2-Pres/55——The President is pleased to make 4, The decoration shall be worn by men on the
the following revised regulations for the award of left breast, suspended from a plain lotus pink ciband
the decoration PADMA VIBHUSHAN in supersession one and a quarter inches in width; and by women - ;
of those published in Notification No, 2-Pres/54, ‘on the left shoulder, suspended from a riband of ”
dated the 2nd January, 1954:— ; ‘the same colour and width fashioned intd a bow. -
; . 5. The decoration shall be awarded for excep-
1. The decoration shall be conferred, by the tional and distinguished service in any field including }
! President by a Sanad under his hand and seal. service rendered by Government’ servants. :
. . . i
a . . . 6. Any person without distinction of race, ;
_ 2, The decoration shall. be. mainly: circular in occupation, position or sex shall be eligible for the :
design, with a geometzical pattern superimposed on award. .
the circle (as in the representative drawing in the . mo :
annexure). The diameter of the circular portion of 7. ‘The decoration may be awarded postho- i
the decoration shall: be one and three-fourth inches mously. . :
be composed of the. outer tines fa oe f ome decoration is conferred, shall be publisned be ue
and theeeixteenths inches ef of a square Of On Gazette of India and a register of all such recipients :
ree-sixteenths inches side, centrally Placed on shall be maintained under the direction of the
each side of which shall be a rectangle projecting President os
beyond the: riti thereby breaking :the circumference : :
of the cireular design of the decoration. A knob #9, The miniature of the decoration which may :
shall be ernbossed within each -of the outer angles be worn. on certain occasions - by recipients shall be :
of the geometrical pattern. There shall be a raised half the size of the PADMA VIBHUSHAN, and a :
circular. space of diameter one and one-sixteenth ~ sealed pattern of the said miniature shall be depoinches forming the centre-piéce of-the decoration. On sited and kept.
the, obverse a lotus flower shall-be embossed in this
circular ‘space. Tho name of the decoration shall ‘be ! 40, ‘The President may cancel and annul the .
vembossed in Hindi, with.the word PADMA placed. award of the decoration to any person and thereupon
above and the word VIBHUSHAN placéd-bolow the his name shall be erased from the ‘Register and he
lotus flower, Om the reverse shall bé-embossed the shall be tequired. ‘to surrender . the decoration and
; “State Exablem and motto’ in Hiadi telow it. The the Sanad. But it~ shall be competent for the
| decoration shall be of toned bronze..@The inscription _ Presiden’ to restore’ the ‘decoration and Sanad and
PADMA VIBHUSHAN on'the obverse of the decora- tocwdthdraw. the orders of cancellation and anmulmont.
tion, the geometrical .patternt on ‘either side and the The notice of cancellation’ or restoration in every
border around the periphery, ‘shall be of burnished case: shall be published, in the Gazette of India.
bronze. embossing a either side of the: decora~ 11; Al] parsons upon whom- the decoration of
‘ ne gore PADMA VIBHUSHAN (PAHELA VARG): was con-
| . , ferred under thé Regulations issued’ with Notification
3. A sealed pattern of the decoration (manu- No. 2-Pres/54, dated the 2nd January,’ 1954, shall,
factured according to the specifications described for all purposes of these regulations, be deemed to
above and the drawing .in the .dnnexure to these persons on whom the decoration of PADMA
regulations) shall be deposited and kept. YVIBHUSHAN has been conferred ‘by the President,
. ANNEXURE
E “-" - Obyerse” . : oo Reverse ,
ee - iG
pe ee ea a ey eee ey
Beate) a eee a anes eee ee gh ES esa
Ce ee re a
a ee
i eee a CS ee.

[PAGE 3]
: No. 3-Pres/55—The President is pleased to make 4, The degoration shall be worn by men on
i aoe! the following revised regulations for the award of the loft breast, suspended from a plain lotus pink
] the decoration PADMA BHUSHAN in supersession riband‘one and a quarter inches in width, with a
| of these published in Notification “No. 2-Pres/54, broad white stripe in the middle; and by women on
! dated the 2nd January, 1954:-— the left shoulder, suspended from a riband of the :
: : * i
7 . same colour and width, fashioned: into a bow. i
: 1, The decoration shall be conferred by the 5, The decoration shall be awarded for distin. |
i President by a Sanad under his hand and seal. guished service of g high order in’ any field including :
service rendered by Government servants, |
| 2. The decoration shall be mainly circular in 6. Any person without distinction of race, |
design, with a geometrical pattern superimposed on occupation, position or sex shall be eligible for the 1
the circle (as in the representative drawing in the award, |
annexure) The diameter of the circular portion of 7, The decoration may be awarded posthu- :
he decoration shall be one and three-fourth inches mously.
and the thickness of the decoration shall be one- .
cighth of an inch. The geometrical pattern shall 8. The names of the persons, upon whom the
' be composed of the outer lines of a-square of one —«tecoration is conferred, shall be published in the
and three-sixteenths inches side, centrally placed on Gazette of India and a register of all such recipients :
each side of which shall be a rectangle projecting of the award shall be’ maintained under the direction i
beyond the rim thereby breaking the circumference of the President. ; :
oe Greular Gesign of the decoration. A knob *9 The miiniatue of the decoration which may
: ; jo embossed within each of the outer angles be worn. on certain: occasions by recipients shall be :
Orne Someitical paticm. There shell be a raised half the size of the PADMA BHUSHAN, and a
; cucular space of diameter one and one.sixteenth sealed pattemn of the said miniature shall be depo- '
inches forming the centre-piece of the decoration. -On sited aud kept, ' , :
the obverse a lotus flower shall be embossed in this
| circular space. The name of the decoration shall be 10. The President may cancel and annul the
: embossed in Hindi, with the word PADMA placed award of the decoration to any person and thereupon
above and the word BHUSHAN placed below the is name shall. be erased from the Register and he
lotus flower. On the reverse shall be embossed the shall be required .to ‘surrender the decoration and
State Embiem and motto in Hindi below it, The ‘he Sanad. But it shall be competent for the
decoration shall be of toned bronze. @The inscription President to restore the decoration and’Sanad aud
PADMA BHUSHAN on the obverse of the decors 0 Withdraw the orders of cancellation and annulment,
; tion, the geometrical pattern on either side and tho The notice of cancellation or restoration in every
: border around the periphery, shall be of burnished case shall be published in the Gazette of India.
H bronze. All embossing on either si Ly - ‘ :
: tion shall be of standeed sold er side of the decora 11. All persons upon whom the decoration of
: . PADMA VIBHUSHAN (DUSRA VARG) was con-
: ferred under the Regulations issued with Notification
: 3. A sealud pattern of the decoration (manufac- No. 2-Pres/54, dated the 2nd January, 1954, shall,
tured according to the specifications described above for all purposes of these regulations, be deemed to
and the drawing in the annexure to these regulations) persons on whom the decoration of PADMA
i shal! be deposited and kept, BHUSHAN has been conferred by the President.
}
|
ANNEXURE
i Obverse . Reverse
t PADMA BHUSHAN
PSU AB CU NOOR SON td Pasesecnee ee) Ve
i) PUR) eRe ie cey pane toe gt) Pies CeHGE eS
a a
err tC(itiCia IN
|
|

[PAGE 4]
qT i
: No. 4-Pres/5S——The President is pleased to make 4. The decoration shall be worn by men on the
: ; the following revised regulations for the award of left breast, suspended from. a lotus pink. riband :
i ne the decoration “PADMA SHRI in supersession ‘one and a quarter inches in width with two narrow
i of ‘those published in Notification No. 2-Pres/54, white stripes each a quarter inch distant from the
| dated the 2nd January, 1954:—. edges of the riband; and by women - on the left i
; shoulder, suspended from a riband of the same colour }
1. ‘The deciation ‘shalt and width fashiSied into a bow,
: : lecoratio .
| President by a Sanad under his hand and sea,” 5:__ The decoration shall be awarded for distin

! . guished service in any field including service rendered

i, by Government servants,

desi = oth aeration shall be mainly circular in 6. ‘Any person without distinction of race,

i _Scometrical pattern ‘superimposed on occupation, position or sex shall be eligible for the

i the circle (as in the sepresefitative drawing in the award.

: annexure). The diameter of the citcular portion of

: the decoration. shall be one- arid thiee-fourth inches 7. The decoration may be awarded posthu-

and the thickness of the decoration shall be one- Mously.

be comesed ot me one ores pattern ‘shall 8. The names of the persons, upon whom the

i and three-sixteenths inches side c tually pl ome Cirordion is conferred, shall be. publisued im ue

each side of which shall be a reatangie placec ine Gazette of India and a register of all such recipients

i beyond the. # an V red ele projecting. , shall be maintained ‘under the direction of the

i yond the rim thereby breaking the circumference President,

; of the circular design of the decoration, A-knob

shall be embossed .within ‘cacli of the outer: angles *9. The miniature of the decoration which may

! of the geoinetrical pattern towards the tim. There be wom on’ certain éccasions by recipients shall te.

: shall-be. a-raised cixcular space of. didmeter one and, half the size of the PADMA SHRI and a sealed

: one-sixteenth inches forming the centre-piece of the pattern of the said: miniature shall be deposited and

; : decoration. On the obverse a lotus ‘flower shall be ‘kept, So. ;

; embossed in’ this circular space, The-name: of the : . ,

; decoration shall be embossed ‘in’ Hind, With the word 10. The President may cancel and annul the

i PADMA. placed above’ and the word SHRI placed award of the decoration to any. person and thereupon

: : below the lotus flower. On ‘the réverse’ aliail be his. namie. shall ‘be ‘erased from ‘the Register and ‘he

embossed the..State. Emblem. and motto in Hindi shall -be ieqitited “to surrender the “decoration and

: _ below it, The decoration shall be of toned bronze. the Sanad.. But. it shall be competent for the

_ @The inscription PADMA’ SHRI on the obverse of President to restore the decoration and Sanad and

: the decoration, the geometrical pattern on either side to withdraw the orders of- cancellation and annulment.

: and the border around. the periphery, shall be. of The notice of cancellation or: restoration in every

: o burnished bronze, All embossing on either side of case shall be published in the ‘Gazette of India,

: . the decoration shali be of stainless steel, . 11. All ‘persons. upon’ whom. the sdecérition of

i . . . PADMA VIBHUSHAN (TISRA “VARG): was cot~ .,

ae ferred. under the Regulations ‘issued with Notification =

3. ‘A sealed pattern of the decoration (manufac: _ No, 2-Pres/54, dated the 2nd January, 1954,: shall, ;
i tured according to the specifications described above for all purposes of. these regulations, be deemed to

i aud the drawing in the annexure to these regulations) persons on whom the decoration of PADMA SHRI

i shall be deposited and kept. hag been. conferred by the President.

: PADMA SHRI-

oe > Obyerse ae | ROVEMO Se
Se et

i Eat TOUS Tan RAO A UES ETCC DES PoE ee nee

[PAGE 5]
. 1
tare ee Sle Wete-33004/99 an REGID. NO. D. L.-33004/99 4
fata gg secpvo nisms |
VAS i
Che Gazette of India :
; STATA
EXTRAORDINARY
aM I—waus 1
PART I—Section 1 :
wiftreare & wenthyra
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY ;
a :
a 243] ae feoch, UEWaT, Hara 18, 2011/enfde 27, 1933
No. 243] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2011/KARTIKA 27, 1933
ween ahaa PRESIDENT’S SECRETARIAT
art NOTIFICATION
ae feest, 16 AAR, 2011 New Delhi, the 16th November, 2011
: f : ~ No. 133-Pres/2011.—The President is pleased to
. a 133-951/2011,—8 a 8 » 1955 direct that the following amendment be made in the
ai sifttegerr dear 1-357/55 & Hea Peas 15 SAAT, 1955 Regulations for the award of the BHARAT RATNA
Sat H Usa A vane aed wT ee & fahaai A published in the Gazette of India of the I 5th January, 1955
frafafad asi fee srt ar freer Se z, aad — under Notification No. 1-Pres/55 dated the 8th January,
y 1955, namely :—
fafraa 5 4, area: .
. . In Regulation 5, for the sentence :
3 ie ra ts , arte site “The decoration shall be awarded for
oa al ay a at gre a at cd AMAT exceptional service towards the
ar sir eaters TAC Tht cre war, @ War advancement of Art, Literature and Science,
@ weed fear wren” and in recognition of public service of the
. . highest order”
al fret oper G yfoeenfiet fra ay : . F
the following sentence shall be substituted :
s te a ii a , * “The decoration shall be awarded in
fnet sft da Wf ait ag arene Baraat recognition of exceptional service/
ei & feret Vat @ werent frat performance of the highest order in any field
wre” of human endeavour”.
feed usa, usafa @ afr CHRISTY FERNANDEZ, Secy. to the President
;
4214 GV/2011 ,
ned by the Manager, Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-11006)
: ° and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-1 10034