[PAGE 1]
ufaegt ae Ste Uee—(TA)04/0007/2003—10 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—10
ae
vee
| FANT
EXTRAORDINARY
wi i— ws 1
PART Il — Section 1 7
wiftenr € wearrierd
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
We 51] ae fereit, dan, faaax 27, 2010 / snfaa 5, 1932
No. 51] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 27, 2010 / ASVINA 5, 1932 |
a a A fr Ys Gen ct one & farsa fe ae sem dae SF BF val aa |
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Dethi, the 27th September, 2010/Asvina 5, 1932 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
26th September, 2010, and is hereby published for general information:— |
THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) ACT, 2010
No. 42 oF 2010 f
(26th September, 2010.]
AnAct to consolidate the law to regulate the acceptance and utilisation of foreign
j contribution or foreign hospitality by certain individuals or associations or | |
companies and to prohibit acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution | |
or foreign hospitality for any activities detrimental to the national interest and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. |
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTERI
PRELIMINARY
1. (/) This Act may be called the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010. Short title,
extent,
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and it shall also apply to— ete
and com-
(a) citizens of India outside India; and mencement.

[PAGE 2]
: 2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part [1— \
| (6) associate branches or subsidiaries, outside India, of companies or bodies
corporate, registered or incorporated in India.
(3) Itshall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as
a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Definitions. 2. (/) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “association” means an association of individuals, whether incorporated or
not, having an office in India and includes a society, whether registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860, or not, and any other organisation, by whatever name 21 of 1860.
called;
(6) “authorised person in foreign exchange” means an authorised person referred
to in clause (c) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999; | 42 of 1999.
(c) “bank” means a banking company as referred to in clause (C) of section 5 of
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949; 10 of 1949.
‘ (d) “candidate for election” means a person who has been duly nominated asa
candidate for election to any Legislature; te te :
(e) “certificate” means certificate of registration granted under sub-section (3) tn
of section 12; TOS OE tae
(f) “company” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause (17) of
section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961; Dy HOUTA 43 of 1961.
(g) “foreign company” means any company or association or body of individuals
incorporated outside India and includes— i tins Actadd
* (i) a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of the Companies ;
Act, 1956; | 1 of 1956.
(ii) a company which is a subsidiary of a foreign company; ee |
(iii) the registered office or principal place of business ofa foreign company i | i |
referred to in sub-clause (i) or company referred to in sub-clause (i/); ~ ed
(iv) a multi-national corporation. Saale li
Explanation — For the purposes of this sub-clause, a corporation incorporated i |
in a foreign country or territory shall be deemed to be a multi-national conporatigit Ni seer
F such corporation,— ef |
(a) has a subsidiary or a branch or a place of business in two or more ak
countries or territories; or | ;
s (4) carries on business, or otherwise operates, in two or more countries or ;
territories; ee |
(A) “foreign contribution” means the donation, delivery or transfer made by any ‘ 4
foreign source,— iy Se |
(i) of any article, not being an article given to a person as a gift for his. ae
personal use, if the market value, in India, of such article, on the date of such gift,
is not more than such sum as may be specified from time to time, by the 7 Nf i |
Government by the rules made by it in this behalf; i ei 4 |
(ii) of any currency, whether Indian or foreign; i hn i ae
(iii) of any security as defined in clause (A) of section 2 of the Securities © é |
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 and includes any foreign security as defined in’ a +1956.
clause (0) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, fe ie 42) 1999,
{. Roetae

[PAGE 3]
j
1 Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
Se eee eee
| ————————SES—>——
a | Explanation |.— A donation, delivery or transfer of any article, currency or
i foreign security referred to in this clause by any person who has received it from any
\ i foreign source, either directly or through one or more persons, shall also be deemed to
‘ | be foreign contribution within the meaning of this clause.
| Explanation 2.— The interest accrued on the foreign contribution deposited in
ee any bank referred to in sub-section (/) of section 17 or any other income derived from
: the foreign contribution or interest thereon shall also be deemed to be foreign
: contribution within the meaning of this clause.
id 4 Explanation 3.— Any amount received, by any person from any foreign source
; i in India, by way of fee (including fees charged by an educational institution in India ;
fj from foreign student) or towards cost in lieu of goods or services rendered by such
=| person in the ordinary course of his business, trade or commerce whether within
ES | India or outside India or any contribution received from an agent of a foreign source
z towards such fee or cost shall be excluded from the definition of foreign contribution
a within the meaning of this clause;
Cacea ae Be an (i) “foreign hospitality” means any offer, not being a purely casual one, made in
ees Bt a cash or kind by a foreign source for providing a person with the costs of travel to any
4° 4 Ee ae foreign country or territory or with free boarding, lodging, transport or medical treatment;
BSS A (/) “foreign source” includes, —
of) eae
Ress ep a (#) the Government of any foreign country or territory and any agency of
iva Be tae such Government; :
By fie EH: (ii) any international agency, not being the United Nations or any of its
F et). te | specialised agencies, the World Bank, International Monetary Fund or such
Ps ioe hi ni other agency as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this
gs S Be behalf;
P= ane (iii) a foreign company;
oa (iv) a corporation, not being a foreign company, incorporated in a foreign
= ee 3 Bo country or territory;
ia ie ‘ea (v) a multi-national corporation referred to in sub-clause (iv) of clause (g);
ee casi AS 6. - (vi) a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956, and more
pile ae a ate ! than one-half of the nominal value of its share capital is held, either singly or in
Sg 5y 8) lh the aggregate, by one or more of the following, namely:— :
Reace ae od (A) the Government of a foreign country or territory;
=f 2 aes (B) the citizens of a foreign country or territory;
; b cabs it (C) corporations incorporated in a foreign country or territory; s
Bale at ae . (D) trusts, societies or other associations of individuals (whether
; Ye iat incorporated or not), formed or registered in a foreign country or territory;
fe ah on (E) foreign company;
‘ a (vii) a trade union in any foreign country or territory, whether or not
: aN registered in such foreign country or territory;
ts 4
+ gee (viii) a foreign trust or a foreign foundation, by whatever name called, or
thease. lg such trust or foundation mainly financed by a foreign country or territory;
1 ; a ie, ix) a society, club or other association of individuals formed or rc. istered
nes =i =
ieee ae ae : outside India;
Pe i ne = (x) a citizen of a foreign country;
See at. Sig

[PAGE 4]
| 4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part Il— ES
(x) “Legislature” means — oa
(A) either House of Parliament; ; a
(B) the Legislative Assembly of a State, or in the case of a State having a be
Legislative Council, either House of the Legislature of that State; | Bata,
(C) Legislative Assembly of a Union territory constituted under the rf
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963; 20 of 1963. i
; (D) Legislative Assembly for the National Capital Territory of Delhi referred ;
. to in the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991; t 1 of 1992. /
(E) Municipality as defined in clause (e) of article 243P of the Constitution; 4
(F) District Councils and Regional Councils in the States of Assam, :
Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram as provided in the Sixth Schedule to the :
Constitution; | eee
(G) Panchayat as defined in clause (d) of article 243 of the Constitution; ; ‘
or :
(H) any other elective body as may be notified by the Central Government; 4
{Pancat is
(J “notification” means notification published in the Official Gazette and the ~ §
expression “notify” shall be construed accordingly; . . 4
(m) “person” includes— . 4
(i) an individual; q
(ii) a Hindu undivided family; (TV aes }
(iii) an association;
(iv) a company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956; ms of 1956. F
(n) “political party” means— ; Heilitfokeeee :
. (/) an association or body of individual citizens of India— 2 ' “i
(A) to be registered with the Election Commission of India asia’ 4
political party under section 29A of the Representation of the People — i.
Act, 1951; or ee 2 43 of 1951. te
(B) which has set up candidates for election to any Legislaure, but ~ os
is not so registered or deemed to be registered under the Election Symbols, : !
r (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968; a 4 a
(ii) a political party mentioned in column 2 of Table | and Table 2 to the SS A
notification of the Election Commission of India No.56/J&K/02, dated the’ ane ae
8th August, 2002, as in force for the time being; adhe a
: (0) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; ie ! i q
(p) “prescribed authority” means an authority specified as such by rules made LS :
by the Central Government under this Act; fuser st ee
(q) “registered newspaper” means a newspaper registered under the Press;and. oa a
Registration of Books Act, 1867: yg 25 of 1867. a
(r) “relative” has the meaning assigned to it in clause (4/) of section 2 ofthe Ho q
‘ Companies Act, 1956; ng Be liof ‘é ‘@
“aa ats {
; "tl (s) “scheduled bank” shal! have the meaning assigned to it under clause oe A oe
section 2 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; = atok i it q

[PAGE 5]
a F
|
i Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 1
Ve a ae. |
; |
} (#) “subsidiary” and “associate” shall have the meanings, respectively assigned
NS | of 1956. to them in the Companies Act, 1956;
4 (u) “trade union” means a trade union registered under the Trade Unions
16 of 1926. Act, 1926;
t
b (2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the
/43 of 1950. Representation of the People Act, 1950 or the Representation of the People Act, 1951 or the
4 of 138" Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to |
f them in those Acts.
CHAPTER II
: P REGULATION OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION AND FOREIGN HOSPITALITY
\ 3. (/) No foreign contribution shall be accepted by any— Prohibition to
‘ . . accept foreign |
(a) candidate for election; contribution.
age (6) correspondent, columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner, printer or publisher of a
‘ registered newspaper;
nn ae (c) Judge, Government servant or employee of any corporation or any other
ewe 4 body controlled or owned by the Government; |
i oa (d) member of any Legislature; ,
5 te Ag (e) political party or office-bearer thereof;
Si z, ; (/) organisation of a political nature as may be specified under sub-section (/) i
: Q 28 & + of section 5 by the Central Government;
Bas + (g) association or company engaged in the production or broadcast of audio i
ee ; =9 news or audio visual news or current affairs programmes through any electronic
ga ua , mode, or any other electronic form as defined in clause (r) of sub-section (/) of |
bea © Blof 2000. section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 or any other mode of mass
oe “ communication;
Ea fae (A) correspondent or columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner of the association
Fe p ee or company referred to in clause (g).
ea $3 . Explanation.—In clause (c) and section 6, the expression “corporation” means
ey a a corporation owned or controlled by the Government and includes a Government
Bi Mor 1956. company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956.
eee | (2) (a) No person, resident in India, and no citizen of India resident outside India, shall
| accept any foreign contribution, or acquire or agree to acquire any currency from a foreign
a | source, on behalf of any political party, or any person referred to in sub-section (/), or both.
q (6) No person, resident in India, shall deliver any currency, whether Indian or foreign,
4 which has been accepted from any foreign source, to any person if he knows or has reasonable
eee cause to believe that such other person intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to any
ia political party or any person referred to in sub-section (/), or both.
: a (c) No citizen of India resident outside India shall deliver any currency, whether Indian ¥
3 or foreign, which has been accepted from any foreign source, to—
a (i) any political party or any person referred to in sub-section (/), or
i both; or
2 Ps
+, Oh (ii) any other person, if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such
Reh other person intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to a political party or to any
di A a person referred to in sub-section (./), or both.

[PAGE 6]
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— rr
| ————— etch hh oie ‘
—_—_—_— uo ;
(3) No person receiving any currency, whether Indian or foreign, froma foreign source 4
on behalf of any person or class of persons, referred to in section 9, shall deliver such &
currency— Bee
(a) to any person other than a person for which it was received, or a
(6) to any other person, if he knows or has reasonable cause to believe that such 4
. other person intends, or is likely, to deliver such currency to a person other than the ‘
person for which such currency was received. “4
. Persons — to 4. Nothing contained in section 3 shall apply to the acceptance, by any person specified ‘
ye = in that section, of any foreign contribution where such contribution is accepted by him, ;
Sua HESDENY subject to the provisions of section 10,— :
(a) by way of salary, wages or other remuneration due to him or to any group of a
persons working under him, from any foreign source or by way of payment in the :
ordinary course of business transacted in India by such foreign source; or x
(6) by way of payment, in the course of international trade or commerce, or in the é.
ordinary course of business transacted by him outside India; or
(c) as an agent of a foreign source in relation to any transaction made by such
foreign source with the Central Government or State Government; or ar
(d) by way of a gift or presentation made to him as a member of any Indian :
delegation, provided that such gift or present was accepted in accordance with the :
rules, made by the Central Government with regard to the acceptance or retention.of . :
such gift or presentation; or
(e) from his relative; or . {
;
(/) by way of remittance received, in the ordinary course of business through |
. any official channel, post office, or any authorised person in foreign exchange under {
the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999; or 42 of 1999.
(g) by way of any scholarship, stipend or any payment of like nature: *
Provided that in case any foreign contribution received by any person specified |
under section 3, for any of the purposes other than those specified under this section, :
such contribution shall be deemed to have been accepted in contravention of the z
provisions of section 3. : oo I
Procedure to 5. (/) The Central Government may, having regard to the activities of the organisation ‘
notify an or the ideology propagated by the organisation or the programme of the organisation or the 4
‘ offs political association of the organisations with the activities of any political party, by an order published ; j
nature. in the Official Gazette, specify such organisation as an organisation of a political nature not E
being a political party, referred to in clause (/) of sub-section (/) of section 3: hi
Provided that the Central Government may, by rules made by it, frame the guidelines j
specifying the ground or grounds on which an organisation shall be specified as. an 3
; organisation of a political nature. j . nt ;
(2) Before making an order under sub-section (/), the Central Government shall give ;
the organisation in respect of whom the order is proposed to be made, a notice in writing |
informing it of the ground or grounds, on which it is proposed to be specified as an organisation t
of political nature under that sub-section. Wot i
(3) The organisation to whom a notice has been served under sub-section (2), may, ; ” }
within a period of thirty days from the date of the notice, make a representation to the Central ;
Government giving reasons for not specifying such organisation as an organisation under i
: sub-section (/): :

[PAGE 7]
"Yt
}
|
i Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY a S
1 |
‘ Provided that the Central Government may entertain the representation after the expiry
} of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the organisation was prevented by
} sufficient cause from making the representation within thirty days. |
{ (4) The Central Government may, if it considers it appropriate, forward the representation
; referred to in sub-section (3) to any authority to report on such representation. |
“4 (5) The Central Government may, after considering the representation and the report of
; the authority referred to in sub-section (4), specify such organisation as-an organisation of *
i a political nature not being a political and make an order under sub-section (/) accordingly.
. i ig ap party Bly.
i . (6) Every order under sub-section (/) shall be made within a period of one hundred and |
| twenty days from the date of issue of notice under sub-section (2):
Provided that in case no order is made within the said period of one hundred and
i twenty days, the Central Government shall, after recording the reasons therefor, make an
i order under sub-section (/) withina period of sixty days from the expiry of the said , eriod of
; one hundred and twenty days.
: + 6. No member ofa Legislature or office-bearer ofa political party or Judge or Government Restriction on |
ue servant or employee of any corporation or any other body owned or controlled by the acceptance of /
il Government shall, while visiting any country or territory outside India, accept, except with foreign ;
ei. the prior permission of the Central Government, any foreign hospitality: hospitality.
et be Provided that it shall not be necessary to obtain any such permission for an emergent |
ess ef medical aid needed on account of sudden i IIness contracted during a visit outside India, but,
pes where such foreign hospitality has been received, the person receiving such hospitality
pent | shall give, within one month from the date of receipt of such hospitality an intimation to the : i
fase | Central Government as to the receipt of such hospitality, and the source from which, and the
Poese2 | manner in which, such hospitality was received by him. |
Se ats 7. No person who — Prohibition |
Lisp en (a) is registered and granted a certificate or has obtained prior permission under sae |
eee this Act; and contribution to
aoe ; (6) receives any foreign contribution, other person.
ness 3 shall transfer such foreign contribution to any other person unless such other person is also
ee ot $ registered and had been granted the certificate or obtained the prior permission under this |
Paige Act:
Be) ee?
dibeas a » Provided that such person may transfer, with the prior approval of the Central
3} BS Government, a part of such foreign contribution to any other person who has not been
Ba granted a certificate or obtained permission under this Act in accordance with the rules made
iid ee by the Central Government.
t et . : . . . es
hop ale 8. (/) Every person, who is registered and granted a certificate or given prior permission _ Restriction to
‘ aan under this Act and receives any foreign contribution, — utilise foreign
ieee (a) shall utilise such contribution for the purposes for which the contribution —
be ee has been received: administrative
t ; Provided that any foreign contribution or any income arising out of it shall not _ purpose.
roy oe be used for speculative business:
fee 4 Provided further that the Central Government shall, by rules, specify the activities or
a business which shall be construed as Speculative business for the purpose of this section;
sy ae (6) shall not defray as far as possible such sum, not exceeding fifty per cent. of
isi such contribution, received in a financial year, to meet adminisirative expenses:
e Provided that administrative expenses exceeding fifty per cent. of such
; contribution may be defrayed with prior approval of the Central Government.
ea | (2) The Central Government may prescribe the elements which shall be included in the
tee administrative expenses and the manner in which the administrative expenses referred to in
Sie sub-section (/) shall be calculated.
eae | 9. The Central Government may— Power of
: (a) prohibit any person or organisation not specified in section 3, from accepting ena 7
come g any foreign contribution; prohibit receipt
Bayt . (b) require any person or class of persons, not specified in section 6, to obtain of foreign conares prior permission of the Central Government before accepting any foreign wibution, etc., in
5 RS hospitality; certain cases,

[PAGE 8]
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II—
(c) require any person or class of persons not specified in section 11, to furnish intimation within such time and in such'manner as may be prescribed as to the amount
of any foreign contribution received by such person or class of persons as the case Bs
may be, and the source from which and the manner in which such contribution was Si
received and the purpose for which and the manner in which such foreign contribution 5
was utilised;
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (/) of section 11, require
: any person or class of persons specified in that sub-section to obtain prior permission
‘ ‘ of the Central Government before accepting any foreign contribution;
(e) require any person or class of persons, not specified in section 6, to furnish
intimation, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, as to the receipt
- of any foreign hospitality, the source from which and the manner in which such
hospitality was received: '
» Provided that no such prohibition or requirement shall be made unless the Central ;
| Government is satisfied that the acceptance of foreign contribution by such person or
} class of persons, as the case may be, or the acceptance of foreign hospitality by such
person, is likely to affect prejudicially —
(i) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or Pains
(ii) public interest; or
(iii) freedom or fairness of election to any Legislature; or) 4. (j)))\.), .
(iv) friendly relations with any foreign State; or = FAS HUN
(v) harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic ar regional
; groups, castes or communities. ; 1
Power 10. Where the Central Government is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it may
to prohibit deem fit, that any person has in his custody or control any article or currency or security, .
ch of whether Indian or foreign, which has been accepted by such person in contravention of any
received in of the provisions of this Act, it may, by order in writing, prohibit such person from paying, 4
contravention delivering, transferring or otherwise dealing with, in any manner whatsoever, such article or |
of the Act. currency or security save in accordance with the written orders of the Central Government 1 <4
and a copy of such order shall be served upon the person so prohibited in the pr<scribed {
manner, and thereupon the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of section 7 of the Be
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 shall, so far as may be, apply to, or inrelationto, 37 of 1967. |
such article or currency or security and references in the said sub-sections to .moneys, te
securities or credits shall be construed as references to such article or currency, or security. i .
{ play OY Such :
CHAPTER IIL i
REGISTRATION 1
Registration of 11. (7) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person having a definite cultural, :
certain persons economic, educational, religious or social programme shall accept foreign contribution unless =
5 pode Central» cchi person obtains a certificate of registration from the Central Government: |
overnment. . i
Provided that any association registered with the Central Government under section 6 4
or granted prior permission under that section of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) 3
. Act, 1976, as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemedto 49 of 1976. |
have been registered or granted prior permission, as the case may be, under this Act and ;
: such registration shall be valid for a period of five years frem the date on which this section
comes into force. eee heen
rare . , (2) Every person referred to in sub-section (/) may, if it is not registered with the
: ua Central Government under that sub-section, accept any foreign contribution. only: after b
‘ - t = is v ti
4 A c

[PAGE 9]
| |
| Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 i
i obtaining the prior permission of the Central Government and such prior permission shall be
: i valid for the specific purpose for which it is obtained and from the specific source: |
Y Provided that if the person referred to in sub-sections (/) and (2) has been found |
| guilty of violation of any of the provisions of this Act or the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) |
_ 49 of 1976. Act, 1976, the unutilised or unreceived amount of foreign contribution shall not be utilised or }
i received, as the case may be, without the prior approval of the Central Government.
j (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, by
| notification in the Official Gazette, specify—
¥ t
| (4 the person or class of persons who shall obtain its prior permission before
: a accepting the foreign contribution; or
: (ii) the area or areas in which the foreign contribution shall be accepted and
3 utilised with the prior permission of the Central Government; or
(iii) the purpose or purposes for which the foreign contribution shall be utilised
3 with the prior permission of the Central Government: or
: ; (iv) the source or sources from which the foreign contribution shall be acce pted
ae | with the prior permission of the Central Government.
f a 12. (/) An application by a person, referred to in section 11 for grant of certificate or Grant of
im giving prior permission, shall be made to the Central Government in such form and manner °ettificate of
Pane and along with such fee, as may be prescribed. seeineRuon: ;
; of (2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (/), the Central Government shall,
La Bt By by an order, if the application is not in the prescribed form or does not contain any of the
aoa particulars specified in that form, reject the application. |
13 2 (3) Ifon receipt of an application for grant of certificate or giving prior permission and
pai after making such inquiry as the Central Government deems fit, it is of the opinion that the
range ae conditions specified in sub-section (+) are satisfied, it may, ordinarily within ninety days
AREA 4 from the date of receipt of application under sub-section (J), register such person and grant
1 a ; him a certificate or give him prior permission, as the case may be, subject to such terms and
eb ae. conditions as may be prescribed:
ie; aq j Provided that in case the Central Government does not grant, within the said period of
foe ninety days, a certificate or give prior permission, it shall communicate the reasons therefor
ae om to the applicant:
“i bi a Provided further that a person shall not be eligible for grant of certificate or giving prior ed
Cae permission, if his certificate has been suspended and such suspension of certificate continues
Rage on the date of making application.
; ; : . (4) The following shall be the conditions for the purposes of sub-section (3), namely:—
3 (a) the person making an application for registration or grant of prior permission
; under sub-section (/),—
Mee (i) is not fititious or benami;
a (ii) has not been prosecuted or convicted for indulging in activities aimed
ae at conversion through inducement or force, either directly or indirectly, from one
; religious faith to another;
f (iii) has not been prosecuted or convicted for creating communal tension
ae or disharmony in any specified district or any other part of the country;
3 | (iv) has not been found guilty of diversion or mis-utilisation of its funds;
f @ (v) is not engaged or likely to engage in propagation of sedition or advocate
eee violent methods to achieve its ends;
nee (vi) is not likely to use the foreign contribution for personal gains or divert
Has th it for undesirable purposes; *
eas ae

[PAGE 10]
10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr I]— Bes.
(vii) has not coniravened any:of the provisions of this Act; 3
(viii) has not been prohibited from accepting foreign contribution; oa
(6) the person making an application for registration under sub-section (/) has ;
. undertaken reasonable activity in its chosen filed for the benefit of the society for :
which the foreign contribution is proposed to be utilised; ‘i
(c) the person making an application for giving prior permission under a
sub-section (/) has prepared a reasonable project for the benefit of the society for :
which the foreign contribution is proposed to be utilised;
(d) in case the person being an individual, such individual has neither been
convicted under any law for the time being in force nor any prosecution for any
offence pending against him: y
(e) in case the person being other than an individual, any of its directors or office
bearers has neither been convicted under any law for the time being in force nor any oe
prosecution for any offence is pending against him;
(/) the acceptance of foreign contribution by the person referred to in subsection (J) is not likely to affect prejudicially—
(4) the sovereignty and integrity of India; or
(ii) the security, strategic, scientific or economic interest of the State; or
(iii) the public interest; or .
(iv) freedom or fairness of election to any Legislature; or
(y) friendly relation with any foreign State; or '
(vi) harmony between religious, racial, social, linguistic, regional groups,
. castes or communities; = ely Lor }
(g) the acceptance of foreign contribution referred to in sub-section (/),— : ;
(i) shall not lead to incitement of an offence; : a t
(ii) shall not endanger the life or physical safety of any person. f
(5) Where the Central Government refuses the grant of certificate or does not give
prior permission, it shall record in its order the reasons therefor and furnish a copy thereof to }
the applicant: | Bey
Provided that the Central Government may not communicate the reasons for refusal for || fee i
grant of certificate or for not giving prior permission to the applicant under this section in Be
cases where is no obligation to give any information or documents or records or papers Baty
under the Right to Informtion Act, 2005. 22 of 2005. Pitas
(6) The certificate granted under sub-section (3) shall be valid for a period of five years | a a
and the prior permission shall be valid for the specific purpose or specific amount of foreign | Bee
contribution proposed to be received, as the case may be. | Bes
Suspension of 13. (/) Where the Central Government, for reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied | Be
: certificate. that pending consideration of the question of cancelling the certificate on any of the grounds , a
mentioned in sub-section (/) of section 14, it is necessary so to do, it may, by order in writing, ee.
suspend the certificate for such period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days as may |
be specified in the order. ee
: (2) Every person whose certificate has been suspended shall — ae
ce
: (a) not receive any foreign contribution during the period of suspension of ey
certificate: ‘ : | ay
: Provided that the Central Government, on an application made by such person, eee
' if it considers appropriate, allow receipt of any foreign contribution by such person on ad
such terms and conditions as it may specify; ee

[PAGE 11]
it Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 |
Te OO
Lah
{ (4) utilise, in the prescribed manner, the foreign contribution in his custody with
Sa the prior approval of the Central Government .
Y 14. (/) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied after making such inquiry as it may Cancellation of
\ deem fit, by an order, cancel the certificate if — certificate,
; (a) the holder of the certificate has made a statement in, or in relation to, the
$ i application for the grant of registration or renewal thereof, which is incorrect or
i - false; or
F i (6) the holder of the certificate has violated any of the terms and conditions of
i the certificate or renewal thereof: or ;
it ia (c) in the opinion of the Central Government, it is necessary in the public interest
to cancel the certificate; or
: (d) the holder of certificate has violated any of the provisions of this Act or rules
ie , or order made thereunder; or
(e) ifthe holder of the certificate has not been engaged in any reasonable activity
ued in its chosen field for the benefit of the society for two consecutive years or has
j become defunct.
aia (2) No order of cancellation of certificate under this section shall be made unless the
eee | person concerned has been given a reasonable Opportunity of being heard.
ed: te (3) Any person whose certificate has been cancelled under this section shall not be
aa eligible for registration or grant of prior permission for a period of three years from the date - .
at ae of cancellation of such certificate.
‘ “4 15. (/) The foreign contribution and assets created out of the foreign contribution in Management !
eee. | the custody of every person whose certificate has been cancelled under section 14 shall vest of foreign con- 1
eet | in such authority as may be prescribed. tribution of |
sete i ; . a . _ person whose
iat eg (2) The authority referred to in sub-section (/) may, if it considers necessary and in certificate has
Si) a public interest, manage the activities of the person referred to in that sub-section for such _ been cancelled.
as a. period and in such manner, as the Central Government may direct and such authority may
tapes | utilise the foreign contribution or dispose of the assets created out of it in case adequate
PRE funds are not available for running such activity.
aa | (3) The authority referred to in sub-section (/) shall return the foreign contribution
Pale and the assets vested upon it under that sub-section to the person referred to in the said
ai | sub-section if such person is subsequently registered under this Act.
ea 16. (/) Every person who has been granted a certificate under section 12 shall have Renewal of |
re z ** such certificate renewed within six months before the expiry of the period of the certificate, certificate.
¢ i (2) The application for renewal of tie certificate shall be made to the Central Government
: “ie | in such form and manner and accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.
si 4 (3) The Central Government shall renew the certificate, ordinarily within ninety days
: from the date of receipt of application for renewal of certificate subject to such terms and
if conditions as it may deem fit and grant a certificate of renewal for a period of five years:
i Provided that in casé the Centra! Government does not renew the certificate within the
; F said period of ninety days, it shall communicate the reasons therefor to the applicant:
} Provided further that the Central Government may refuse to renew the certificate in
, : case where a person has violated any of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder,
CHAPTER IV
a ACCOUNTS, INTIMATION, AUDIT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS, ETC. .
ep az Se 17. (/) Every person who has been granted a certificate or given prior permission Foreign —
e under section 12 shall receive foreign contribution in a single account only through such contribution
a 3 eA at (a ots . 5 through
a one of the branches of a bank as he may specify in his application for grant of certificate: schedated
: q Provided that such person may Open one or more accounts in one or more banks for bank,
Sat em utilising the foreign contribution received by him:

[PAGE 12]
; re We BEsvl™ —
12__THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY __S 4
- Provided further that no funds other than foreign contribution shall be received or @
deposited in such account or accounts. E
(2) Every bank or authorised person in foreign exchange shall report to such authority a
as may be specified— Be
(a) prescribed amount of foreign remittance; §
(6) the source and manner in which the foreign remittance was received; 3
(c) other particulars, a
in such form and manner as may be prescribed. i
Intimation. 18. (/) Every person who has been granted a certificate or given prior approval under I
this Act shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation
to the Central Government, and such other authority as may be specified by the Central iB
Government, as to the amount of each foreign contribution received by it, the source from it
which and the manner in which such foreign contribution was received, and the purposes for HP
which, and the manner in which such foreign contribution was utilised by him. iE
(2) Every person receiving foreign contribution shall submit a copy of a statement 5
indicating therein the particulars of foreign contribution received duly certified by officer of |
the bank or authorised person in foreign exchange and furnish the same to the Central
Government along with the intimation under sub-section (/). - : ia
Maintenance 19. Every person who has been granted a certificate or given prior approval under this : f
of accounts. Act shall maintain, in such form and manner as may be prescribed— nee 4
(a) an account of any foreign contribution received by him; and
(6) a record as to the manner in which such contribution has been utilised
by him. 4
Audit of 20. Where any person who has been granted a certificate or given prior permission, a
accounts. fails to furnish any intimation under this Act within the time specified therefor or the intimation {
so furnished is not in accordance with law or if, after inspection of such intimation, the i if
Central Government has any reasonable cause to believe that any provision of this Act has i
been, or is being, contravened, the Central Government may, by general or speci“| order, i He
~ authorise such gazetted officer, holding a Group A post under the Central Government or any j 4
other officer or authority or organisation, as it may think fit, to audit any books of account 1a
kept or maintained by such person and thereupon every such officer shall have the right to ig
enter in or upon any premises at any reasonable hour, before sunset and after sunrise, for the i :
‘ purpose of auditing the said books of account: 2 colada Ri
Provided that any information obtained from such audit shall be kept confidential and 7
shall not be disclosed except for the purposes of this Act. }
F Intimation by 21, Every candidate for election, who had received any foreign contribution, at any h 3
candidate for time within one hundred and eighty days immediately preceding the date on which he is duly By
lection: nominated as such candidate, shall give, within such time and in such manner as may be |
prescribed, an intimation to the Central Government or prescribed authority or both as to the 4 |
amount of foreign contribution received by him, the source from which, and the manner in ; |
: which, such foreign contribution was received and the purposes for which and the manner in :
which such foreign contribution was utilised by him. 4 4
Disposal of 22. Where any person who was permitted to accept foreign contribution’ under this
assets created ~— Act, ceases to exist or has become defunct, all the assets of such person shall be disposed
out chong of in accordance with the provisions contained in any law for the time being in force under ’
. contribution. Which the person was registered or incorporated, and in the absence of any, such law, the
! Central Government may, having regard to the nature of assets created out.of foreign
contribution received under this Act, by notification, specify that all, such assets shall be
disposed off by such authority, as it may specify, in such manner and procedure as may be
< prescribed. i suit ti

[PAGE 13]
* Nest yy —_— r: =)
* 7 1
‘ |
| |
| Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13
a EOS
| St) TE GAETTE OF NOVA EXTRAORDINARY _s
{ CHAPTER V
Me i INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE
i 23. If the Central Government has, for any reason, to be recorded in writing, any Inspection of
1 | ground to suspect that any provision of this Act has been or is being, contravened by— ee or
records.
4 (a) any political party; or
4 (6) any person; or
» q . .
+ (c) any organisation; or
;
i (d) any association,
3 it may, by general or special order, authorise such gazetted officer, holding a Group A post
| under the Central Government or such other officer or authority or organisation, as it may
i think fit (hereinafter referred to as the inspecting officer), to inspect any account or record
._ Maintained by such political party, person, organisation or association, as the case may be,
a “and thereupon every such inspecting officer shall have the right to enter in or upon any
4 premises at any reasonable hour, before sunset and after sunrise, for the purpose of inspecting
4 the said account or record.
gq 24. If, after inspection of an account or record referred to in section 23, the inspecting Seizure of
i officer has any reasonable cause to believe that any provision of this Act or of any other law Bacay =
i: relating to foreign exchange has been, or is being, contravened, he may seize such account ‘°°'*Si or record and produce the same before the court, authority or tribunal in which any proceeding :
is brought for such contravention:
: y 4 Provided that the authorised officer shall return such account or record to the person }
2 from whom it was seized if no proceeding is brought within six months from the date of such
as seizure for the contravention disclosed by such account or record.
igs 25. If any gazetted officer, authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by Seizure of
sg general or special order, has any reason to believe that any person has in his possession or phase
bg control any article exceeding the value specified in sub-clause (i) of clause (A) of sub- security
ae section (/) of section 2 or currency or security whether Indian or foreign, in relation to received in
rate i a which any provision of this Act has been or is being, contravéned, he may seize such contravention
4 article or currency or security. of the Act.
ae 26. (/) The Central Government, may, having regard to the value of article or currency Disposal of
mee or security, their vulnerability to theft or any relevant consideration, by notification, specify S¢ized article
q such article or currency or security which shall, as soon as may be after their seizure, be ae sa)
% q . disposed of by such officer and in such manner, as the Central Government may, from time
a to time, determine after following the procedure hereinafter specified.
ch oe (2) The article or currency or security seized shall be forwarded without unnecessary
% delay to such officer as may be specified.
j (3) Where any article or currency or security has been seized and forwarded to such
officer, the officer referred to in sub-section (/), shall prepare an inventory of such article or
currency or security containing such details relating to their description, value or such
En ae other identifying particulars as the officer referred to in that sub-section may consider relevant
to the identity of the article or the currency or security and make an application to any
: Magistrate for the purposes of certifying the correctness of the inventory so prepared.
F (4) Where an application is made under sub-section (2), the Magistrate shall, as
eI -soon as may be, allow the application.
-@ 1 of 1872, (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or the Code
2 of 1974: of Criminal Procedure, 1973, every court trying an offence under this Act, shall treat the
a inventory, as certified by the Magistrate, as primary evidence in respect of such offence.
t a (6) Every officer acting under sub-section (3) shall forthwith report the seizure to the
: Court of Session or Assistant Sessions Judge having jurisdiction for adjudging the
deta Nea confiscation under section 29.

[PAGE 14]
“at.
14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr lI—
——— ————_—_—__——————— EOE
SSSSououauauouoaoee eS
Seizure to be 27. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply in so far as they
made in accor- are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act to all seizures made under this Act.
dance with Act
2 of 1974.
CHAPTER VI
ADJUDICATION
* Confiscation 28. Any article or currency or security which is seized under section 25 shall be liable
otauticle sf to confiscation if such article or currency or security has been adjudged under section 29 to
Pair have been received or obtained in contravention of this Act.
obtained in
contravention
of the Act.
Adjudication of 29. (/) Any confiscation referred to in section 28 may be adjudged—
confiscation. . ;
(a) without limit, by the Court of Session within the local limits of whose
jurisdiction the seizure was made: and !
(6) subject to such limits as may be prescribed, by such officer, not below the
rank of an Assistant Sessions Judge, as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, :
(2) When an adjudication under sub-section (/) is concluded by the Court of Session .
or Assistant Sessions Judge, as the case may be, the Sessions Judge or Assistant Sessions
Judge may make such order as he thinks fit for the disposal by confiscation or delivery of
seized article or currency or security, as the case may be, to any person claiming to be entitled
to possession thereof or otherwise, or which has been used for the commission of any
offence under this Act.
Procedure for 30. No order of adjudication of confiscation shall be made unless a reasonable
confiscation. opportunity of making a representation against such confiscation has been given to the
¥ person from whom any article or currency or security has been seized.
CHAPTER VII
APPEAL AND REVISION
Appeal. 31. (/) Any person aggrieved by any order made under section 29 may prefer an
appeal, — ’
¢ (a) where the order has been.made by the Court of Session, to the High Court to
which such Court is subordinate: or
(4) where the order has been made by any officer specified under clause (6) of
sub-section (/) of section 29, to the Court of Session within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction such order of adjudication of confiscation was made,
: within one month from the date of communication to such person of the order:

Provided that the appellate court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented ‘

by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said period of one month, allow
* such appeal to be preferred within a further period of one month, but not thereafter.

(2) Any organisation referred to in clause (/) of sub-section (/) of section 3, or any
person or association referred to in section 6 or section 9, aggrieved by an order made in
pursuance of section 5 or by an order of the Central Government refusing to give permission

‘ under this Act, or by any order made by the Central Government under sub-section (2) or
sub-section (4) of section 12, or sub-section (J) of section 14, as the case may be, may, within
sixty days from the date of such order, prefer an appeal against such order to the High Court

[PAGE 15]
: |
\ : |
! Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 } |
| eeesoOowowo0O0OaQooQoooaooeeeN eo |
i within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the appeilant ordinarily resides or carries on |
business or personally works for gain, or, where the appellant is an organisation or association,
: the principal office of such organisation or association is located.
; (3) Every appeal preferred under this section shall be deemed to be an appeal from an
j original decree and the provisions of Order XLI of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil
} 5 of 1908. Procedure, 1908, shall, as far as may be, apply thereto as they apply to an appeal from an \
ss original decree. .
D 32. (/) The Central Government may, either of its own motion or on an application for Revision of
F revision by the person registered under this Act, call for and examine the record of any orders by
ae proceeding under this Act in which any such order has been passed by it and may make such > scale ;
‘a inquiry or cause such inquiry to be made and, subject to the provisions of this Act, may pass ;
“ such order thereon as it thinks fit.
; 3 (2) The Central Government shall not of its own motion revise any order under this
# section if the order has been made more than one year previously.
ke
|e (3) In the case of an application for revision under this section by the person referred
ie to in sub-section (/), the application must be made within one year from the date on which |
ne the order in question was communicated to hii or the date on which he otherwise came to |
Bi know of it, whichever is earlier:
ie | Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that such person was
: % prevented by sufficient cause from making the application within that period, admit an :
Ne application made after the expiry of that period.
BY (4) The Central Government shall not revise any order where an appeal against the
+ order lies but has not been made and the time within which such appeal may be made has not
Che expired or such person has not waived his right of appeal or an appeal has been filed under
a this Act.
hy ve :
Fags ~ (35) Every application by such person for revision under this section shall be
Fs if accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed.
ie 4 Explanation — An order by the Central Government declining to interfere shall, for
ack the purposes of this section, be deemed not to be an order prejudicial to such person:
‘y CHAPTER VIII |
“a OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
ee | 33, Any person, subject to this Act, who knowingly, — Making of false j
td : a F ; . statement,
a (a) gives false intimation under sub-section (c) of section 9 or section 18; or declaration or
i F oe F ’ . . detivei false
ii (6) seeks prior permission or registration by means of fraud, false represeritation acconats
Z or concealment of material fact,
re shall, on conviction by a court, be liable to imprisonment for a term which may extend to six |
aw): months or with fine or with both. .
ia i 34. If any person, on whom any prohibitory order has been served under section 10, Penalty for
ae: pays, delivers, transfers or otherwise deals with, in any manner whatsoever, any article or ticle or
eg - Pacts A ies currency or:
a currency or security, whether Indian or foreign, in contravention of such prohibitory order, security
ag he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or obtained in
a with fine, or with both; and notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal contravention
9) 2 of 1974. Procedure, 1973, the court trying such contravention may also impose on the person convicted Ff section 10.
Ps i an additional fine equivalent to the market value of the article or the amount of the currency
ig or security in respect of which the prohibitory order has been contravened by him or such
Nae ia part thereof as the court may deem fit.
ey be

[PAGE 16]
16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr lI— 2
Punishment for 35. Whoever accepts, or assists any person, political party or organisation in accepting, ant
contravention any foreign contribution or any currency or security from a foreign source, in contravention 7
paige the aes. of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, shall be punished with 7
. imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or with both. 3,
power to 36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the 2 of 1974.
impose addi- Court trying a person, who, in relation to any article or currency or security, whether Indian :
tional fine or foreign, does or omits to do any act which act or omission would render such article or
bac = currency or security liable to confiscation under this Act, may, in the event of the conviction
‘ security is not Of Such person for the act or omission aforesaid, impose on such person a fine not exceeding
available for five times the value of the article or currency or security or one thousand rupees, whichever
confiscation. —_js more, if such article or currency or security is not available for confiscation, and the fine so i
imposed shall be in addition to any other fine which may be imposed on such person under
this Act.
Penalty for 37. Whoever fails to comply with any provision of this Act for which no separate 9
riggers penalty has been provided in this Act shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which i
punishment has ™2Y extend to one year, or with fine or with both.
been provided. :
Prohibition of 38. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, whoever, having been onyirtes :
—— of of any offence under section 35 or section 37, in so far as such offence relates to the
eect bnliOL: acceptance or utilisation of foreign contribution, is again convicted of such offence shall j
* not accept any foreign contribution for a period of five years from the date of the subsequent . }
conviction. er eat
Offences by 39. (/) Where an offence under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been
companies. committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in
charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the | Bes:
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the. offence. and shall be Peg
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: ; artlile or fie
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render such person liable to. j
any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge-or that :
he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence... sic ©. {
*(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence under i
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been committed by a company and it is VF
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is oy
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer Bt
of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to ia
"be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. a
, Explanation—For the purposes of this section,— |
(2) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm, society, trade Sh
union or other association of individuals; and : PERG _' a Hee
.. (6) “director”, in relation to a firm, society, trade union or other association. I a
. of individuals, means a partner in the firm or a member of the governing body of Be
such society, trade union or other association of individuals. } a4
Bar on — 40. No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act, except, with, the, ] a
prosecution previous sanction of the Central Government or any officer authorised by that Government oe
of offences ‘ A . iain aes j a
under the Act, i this behalf. t Siiess OF the aa
Composition 41. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure; 1973, 2 of 1974. | ‘a
of certain any offence punishable under this Act (whether committed by an individual or association or | a
offences. any officer or employee thereof), not being an offence punishable with imprisonment only, \
may, before the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by such officers or authorities ee |
1 and for such sums as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, | at
specify in this behalf. 5 . ; ot
eee . ee

[PAGE 17]
| |
4]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17
ah 8NeN0a070—®@®>@0oOnOowoowoa®@m@>$389oTo0o09a9aoD —
AA
: (2) Nothing in sub-section (/) shall apply to an offence committed by an individual or
\ association or its officer or other employee within a period of three years from the date on
fi * which a similar offence committed by it or him was compounded under this section.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, any second or subsequent offence
committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the offence was
; previously compounded, shall be deemed to be a first offence.
| (3) Every officer or authority referred to in sub-section (/) shall exercise the powers to
Hl compound an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.
j (4) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made to the officer
or authority referred to in sub-section (/) in such form and manner along with such fee as
may be prescribed.
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution, no
4 prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relatior. to
4 whom the offence is so compounded.
: (6) Every officer or authority referred to in sub-section (J), while dealing with a proposal .
i for the compounding of an offence for a default in compliance with any provision of this Act
: which requires by an individual or association or its officer or other employee to obtain
permission or file or register with, or deliver or send to, the Central Government or any
¥ a prescribed authority any return, account or other document, may, direct, by order, if he or it .
4 thinks fit to do so, any individual or association or its officer or other employee to file or
a register with, such return, account or other document within such time as may be specified in
i the order. |
i CHAPTER IX
x . MISCELLANEOUS
g 4 42. Any inspecting officer referred to in section 23 who is authorised in this behalf by Power to
4 the Central Government may, during the course of any inspection of any account or record cal for ‘i
oe 4 maintained by any political party, person, organisation or association in connection with the m document
ote contravention of any provision of this Act, —
> (a) call for information from any person for the purpose of satisfying himself
‘ 7 whether there has been any contravention of the provisions of this Act or rule or order
4 made thereunder;
(6) require any person to produce or deliver any document or thing useful or
t relevant to such inspection;
‘ ; (c) examine any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case
4 related to the inspection.
| @ of 1974. 43. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any Investigation
4 offence punishable under this Act may also be investigated into by such authority as the me rhe A '
i Central Government may specify in this behalf and the authority so specified shall have al] “?°°r te Act.
a. the powers which an officer-in-charge of a police station has while making an investigation
4 into a cognizable offence.
4 * 44. The prescribed authority shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and Returns by
i in such form and manner such returns and statements as may be prescribed. eee
t authority to
3 . Central
/ Government.
45. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or Protection of
a the authority referred to in section 44 or any of its officers in respect of any loss oi damage Sean a
; caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 200 faith.
1) 2 done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or, any rule or order made thereunder.

[PAGE 18]
< ae f
18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
EN
‘ Power of 46. The Central Government may give such directions as it may deem necessary to any
' oe canes to other authority or any person or class of persons regarding the carrying into execution of the
\ givedirections, Provisions of this Act.
Delegation of 47. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of its powers or
powers. functions under this Act, except power to make rule under section 48, shall, in relation to
such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, may be specified in the notification, be
exercised or discharged also by such authority as may be specified.
Power to 48. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the
make rules. provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the value of the article which may be specified under sub-clause (i) of clause
(A) of sub-section (/) of section 2;

(b) the authority which may be specified under clause (p) of sub-section (/) of
section 2;

(c) acceptance or retention of gift or presentation under clause (d) of section 4;

(a) guidelines specifying the ground or grounds on which an organisation. may
be specified as an organisation of political nature under sub-section (/) of section 5;

(e) the activities or business which shall be construed as speculative business

. under the proviso to clause (a) of sub-section (/) of. section 8pe2in necessary .o uny

(/) the elements and the manner in which the administrative expenses shall be

» -‘ealculated under sub-section (2) of section 8;

(g) the time within which and the manner in which any person or class of persons
or an association may be required to furnish intimation regarding the amount of foreign
contribution received under clause (c) of section 9; eo : ; be

(A) the time within which and the manner. in which any person or class of
persons may be required to furnish intimation regarding foreign hospitality under
clause (e) of section 9; BRE TB Iee Fur cele ie as

(i) the manner in which the copy of the order of the Central Government shall be
served upon any person under section 10; : ibe ore,olly power, such

(/) the form and manner in which the application for grant of certificate of
registration or giving of prior permission under sub-section (/) of section 123.0.»

(k) the fee to be accompanied by the application under sub-section (/) of

‘ section 12; 340) ob sub- oi. ta)
(J) the terms and conditions for granting a certificate or giving prior permission
under clause (g) of sub-section (4) of section 12; \ rine ell tr
(m) the manner of utilising the foreign contribution under clause (6) of subsection (2) of section 13; i mr ction (.) of scetion §
(n) the authority with whom the foreign contribution to be.vested. under sub-
. section (/) of section 15; ;
(0) the period within which and the manner in. which the foreign contribution
shall be managed under sub-section (2) of section 15;
(p) the form and manner in which the application for arenewaliof certificateof
registration shall be made under sub-section (2) of section 16;0)¢ Hou oie)
. (q) the fee to be accompanied by the application for renewal of certificate under
sub-section (2) of section 16; fh ally perso or she i
(r) the prescribed amount of foreign remittance, the form and manner in which
] the foreign remittance received by every bank or authorised person in foreign exchange
‘shall be reported under sub-section (2) of section.17;. 028 al Goveramicn. stall bs
&
’ i. 1 Ve ed

[PAGE 19]
i Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 .
{ _08e0e—=~$@M—*S0OmRO@wao(C*oOon@ma@9@a@owwoO0aBoDomaa
oe (s) the time within which and the manner in which the person who has been
4} granted certificate of registration or given prior permission under this Act shall give
\ ; intimation under section 18;
‘a ; (¢) the form and manner in which account of any foreign contribution and
i the manner in which such contribution has been utilised shall be maintained under
“4 section 19;
j (u) the time within which and the manner in which a candidate for election shall
‘ give intimation under section 21;
i (v) the manner and procedure to be followed in disposing of the assets under
{ section 22;
(w) the limits subject to which any confiscation may be adjudged under clause
! (d) of sub-section (/) of section 29; ,
| (x) the fee to be accompanied along with every application for revision under
4 sub-section (5) of section 32;
; (y) the form and manner for making of an application for compounding of an
| offence and the fee therefor under sub-section (4) of section 4 Ie
(z) the form and manner in which and the time within which returns and statements
} to be furnished by the prescribed authority under section 44;
: . (za) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 5
j y q y be, p
; 49. Every order made under section 5 and every rule made by the Central Government Orders and rules
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of cue
j Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised :
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the ‘
\ session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both
4 Houses agree in making any modification in the order or rule or both Houses agree that
" the order or rule should not be made, the order or rule shall thereafter have effect only in
} such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
4 modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
4 done under that order or rule.
§ 50. If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient in the Power to
interests of the general public so to do, it may, by order and subject to such conditions as ¢Xempt in
; may be specified in the order, exempt any person or association or organisation (not being a eae
& political party), or any individual (not being a candidate for election) from the operation of all
i ; or any of the provisions of this Act and may, as often as may be necessary, revoke or
‘ : modify such order.
i 51. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any transaction between the Act not to : |
Government of India and the Government of any foreign country or territory. apply to certain
a Government
: transactions.
4 : 52. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Application of
: provisions of any other law for the time being in force. ; ae oe
53. (/) Ifany difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Power to ;
: Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not aiftealiics
: inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the .
if difficulty:
Provided that no order shal! be made under this section after the expiry of two years
i from the commencement of this Act.
: (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
: made, before each House of Parliament.
lp ae

[PAGE 20]
ty
. 20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY __ [Part lI—Sec. 1] }
a ee eee ere |
Cn mmmmiiji.gy
Repeal and 54. (/) The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976 (hereafter referred to as the 49 of 1976. |
saving, repealed Act) is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,—
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken I
under the repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of }
this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of
this Act; |
(6) any organisation of a political nature, not being a political party, to whom the |
prior permission was granted under section 5 of the repealed Act, shall continue to be | f |
the organisation ofa political nature, not being a political party, under clause (f) of sub- |
section (/) of section 3 of this Act, till such permission is withdrawn by the Central f |
Government; i
(c) permission to accept foreign hospitality granted under section 9 of the repealed
Act shall be deemed to be the permission granted under section 6 of this Act until such
. permission is withdrawn by the Central Government;
(d) any association prohibited from accepting any foreign contribution under
clause (a) of section 10 of the repealed Act, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the ;
provisions of this Act, shall be deemed to be an association prohibited from accepting 7
. any foreign contribution under section 9 of this Act;
(e) permission obtained under clause (4) of section 10 of the repealed Act shall, ' ,
in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be the ks
permission until such permission is withdrawn by the Central Government; ‘
(/ any order issued under section 12 of the repealed Act shall be deemed to be an :
order issued under section 10 of this Act; 4
(g) any order issued under section 31 of the repealed Act exempting any :
association or any individual shall be deemed to be an order under section 50 of this ;
Act till such order is varied or revoked. 4
(3) Save as provided in sub-section (2), mention of particular matters in that subsection shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the 4
General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeal. 10 of 1897.
V.K. BHASIN, f |
Secy. to the Govt. of India. |
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI AND
PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-2010 {
GMGIPMRND—4639GI(S3)—29-09-2010. , ’
‘ fs ;

[PAGE 21]
(NOT IN FORCE AS YET)
thre de Ste Te-—(G7)04/0007/2003—10 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—10
HATA
EXTRAORDINARY
wT W— as i
PART Il — Section 1
wife a wearrfera a
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
a
We 54] ag facet, array, fearax 13, 2010/ HIRAM 22, 1932( RH)
No. 54] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, DECEMBER 13, 2010/AGRAHAYANA 22, 1932 (SAKA)
ih ee eer a ESS
NN ———————
3a at FT Ts Gor at net & free fr ae ster HET S ETF TEI A aS | :
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
Nene ————————————EEEE— LT
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 13th December, 2010/Agrahayana 22, 1932 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the :
11th December, 2010, and is hereby published for general information:—
THE APPROPRIATION (No. 6) ACT, 2010
No. 45 or 2010
[11th December, 2010]
An Act to provide for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the

Consolidated Fund of India to meet the amounts spent on certain services

during the financial year ended on the 31st day of March, 2009, in excess of

the amounts granted for those services and for that year.

. Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:—

1. This Act may be called the Appropriation (No. 6) Act, 2010. Short title.

2. From and out of the Consolidated Fund of India, the sums specified in column 3 of Issue of Rs.
the Schedule, amounting in the aggregate to the sum of one thousand twelve crores, eighty- bao = ay
one lakhs, ninety-eight thousand, one hundred and seventeen rupees shall be deemed to Consolidated
have been authorised to be paid and applied to meet the amounts spent for defraying the Fund of India
charges in respect of the services specified in column 2 of the Schedule during the financial to meet
year ended on the 31st day of March, 2009, in excess of the amounts granted for those eects
services and for that year. for the year

ended on 31st e day of March,
2009.

[PAGE 22]
)
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
Appropriation. 3, The sums deemed to have been authorised to be paid and applied from and out of
the Consolidated Fund of India under this Act shall be deemed to have been appropriated for
the services and purposes expressed in the Schedule in relation to the financial year ended
on the 3 lst day of March, 2009.

[PAGE 23]
Sel] CTH GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
THE SCHEDULE
(See sections 2 and 3)
1 2 ——<——— a
Excess
No. of Services and purposes Voted Charged
Vote portion portion Total
Rs. : Rs.
19 | Ministry of Defence ............-..0:sssseessereene REVENUE 27,49,86,122 27,49,86,122
20 | Defence Pensions .........c.ceceseeeeeeeee Revenue 13,32,985 13,32,985
2B | Defence Services — Air Force ..................... Revenue 610,36,59,389 610,36,59,389
24 | Defence Ordnance Factories........................ Revenue 132,24,87,268 132,24,87,268
39 | PeMSIONS .......ceseceeseseesesesesseererteneeeeeseeneereeeee REVENUE 163,18,09,424 163,18,09,424
54 | Other Expenditure of the Ministry of
Home Affairs 00.0... ceeseeeseeeeeeeesereeereeeeeeee REVENUE 79,39,22,929 79,39,22,929
TOTAL os 1012,81,98,117| «| ——(1012,81,98,117
CORRIGENDA
In the Legal Metrology Act, 2009 (No. lof 2010), as published in the Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 1, dated the 14th January, 2010 (Issue No. 1),—
@ at page 14, line 9, for “52” read “53”;
(ii) at page 14, line 13, for “52” read “53”.
CORRIGENDA
In the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (42 of 2010), published in the
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section | , dated the 27th September, 2010 (Issue No. 51),—
. 1. At page 9, line 38, for “fititious”, read “fictitious”.
2. At page 10,—
(i) line 4, for “filed”, read “field”.
(ii) line 32, for “where is”, read “where there is”.
3. At page 15, line 33, for “sub-section (c)”, read “clause (c)”’.
4. At page 18, line 5, for “rule”, read “rules”.
V.K. BHASIN,
Secy. to the Govt. of India.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT, OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI, 2010.
GMGIPMRND—5935GI(S3)—14-12-2010.