[PAGE 1]
MOST IMMEDIATE/TRIBUNAL MATTER
BY IB FAX AND SPEED POST
No. No.11011/05/2018-NE-V
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS
Dated the 30 November, 2018
To
Shri Lalit Kumar Gupta,
Chief Secretary,
Government of Tripura,
Agartala.
Subject: Declaration of the National Liberation Front of Tripura and All Tripura
Tiger Force as Unlawful Associations under sub-section (1) of section
3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967- service of show
cause notice reg.
Sir, ,
| am directed to refer to letter No. O2/ULAT/NLFT & ATTF, dated
29.11.2018 received from Registrar, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal
forwarding therewith an order, dated 27.11.2018 issued by the NLFT & ATTF
Tribunal along with true copy of the show cause notice to be served on the above
mentioned unlawful associations.
2. The Hon’ble Tribunal in its preliminary hearing held on 27.11.2018
passed an order related to show cause notices to be issued to the National
Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) and All Tripura Tiger Force (ATTF) along with
all its factions, wings and front organization under sub section 2 of section 4 of
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 to show cause within 30 days from
the date of service of the notices as to why the said Associations should not be
declared unlawful and why order should not be made confirming the declaration
made under Section 1(3) of the Act. Copies of the show cause notices to be
served to these organizations duly signed by Registrar, Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Tribunal are enclosed alongwith copy of order dated 27.11.2018.
3. The State Government is requested to take necessary action as
directed by the Hon'ble Tribunal.

[PAGE 2]
4. The Service Report is to be submitted to Hon’ble Tribunal before 21°
January, 2019. Hence, an action taken report on order of the Hon’ble Tribunal
. may be sent to MHA latest by 5.1.2019. Copies of the Newspapers publishing
the above show cause notice, undertaking to the effect of proclaiming the same
by beat of drums and serving and pasting of the notice at conspicuous and
district headquarters may be sent to this Ministry. Also details of
broadcasting/telecast in the electronic media, may be forwarded to this Ministry
for filing a Service Affidavit before the Tribunal. The State Government of Tripura
may also file a separate Affidavit regarding service of notices to these Unlawful
associations before the Hon’ble Tribunal well before the next date of hearing.

5. The Registrar of the Tribunal Shri J.K. Batra shall visit to the State for

supervising the service of notices 10 days before from the next date of hearing,

as directed by the Hon'ble Tribunal vide its above order, dated 27.11.2018.

6. Meanwhile as per the order of the Tribunal, State Govt. is requested

to submit their affidavit and documents, in support of the grounds on which the

aforesaid associations have been declared unlawful, to the Tribunal and protect
the interest of the State Govt. during the course of the hearing in the Tribunal
through the Counsel of the State Govt. The next date of hearing in the matter
is 21% January, 2019, at 4.30 p.m. in Delhi High Court, Sher Shah Road, New
Delhi- 110 003.
6. This may please be treated as MOST URGENT
Yours faithfully,
\_ Saye
(Neeta Gupta )
Director, NE
Copy to:

/ Director, NIC, Smt. M.P. Sughandhi. A copy of the Show Cause Notice to
be served to NLFT & ATTF is enclosed herewith and the same may be
published on the website of the Ministry of Home Affairs (http://mha.nic.in)
and compliance may be sent to the Director, NE, accordingly.

2. Shri A Deb,Under Secretary(Home), Government of Tripura, Agartala.
Nic . MRA
So Ee
- “ ” a) PH
Mic eg Pleo as i
2 .

[PAGE 3]
OFFICE OF THE REGISTRAR UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL

ROOM NO. 220, IInd FLOOR, A BLOCK, HIGH COURT OF DELHI

SHER SHAH ROAD, NEW DELHI-110003

Re: Notification No. $.0. 5078(E) dated 3” October, 2018 issued by the
Central Government under section 3(1) of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act,
declaring the National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) & All Tripura Tiger Force
(ATTF) to be unlawful associations from the date of the notification.
To
National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) & All Tripura Tiger Force (ATTF)

WHEREAS the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by
Sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities [Prevention] Act, 1967 (37 of
1967) (hereinafter referred to as “The Act”) has declared the National Liberation
Front of Tripura (NLFT) & All Tripura Tiger Force (ATTF) alongwith all their factions,
wings and front organizations to be unlawful associations with immediate effect
vide Notification No. S.0. 5078(E) dated 03.10.2018 (published in the Gazette of
India, Extraordinary, Part-ll, Section 3, Sub-section (ii) dated 3° October, 2018).

AND WHEREAS vide Gazette Notification No. S.0. 5741(E) dated 15"
November, 2018, in exercise of powers under Section 5(1) of the Act, the Central
Government has constituted the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal
comprising Hon'ble Mr. Justice Suresh Kumar Kait, Judge, Delhi High Court, for the
purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the
said National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT) & All Tripura Tiger Force (ATTF) as
Unlawful Associations as required by Sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the Act.

Now THEREFORE, a Notice is hereby given under sub-section (2) of Section
4 of the Act read with Rule 6 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 and
you are hereby called upon to show cause in writing within 30 days from the date of
service of this Notice as to why the said National Liberation Front of Tripura (NLFT)
& All Tripura Tiger Force (ATTF) be not adjudicated for declaring as unlawful
associations and why an order should not be made confirming the declaration to
the above effect made in the above mentioned Notification.

The objections/reply/written statement, if any, may be filed/delivered
within the statutory period of 30 days from the date of service before the Registrar
of this Tribunal i.e. the undersigned at Room No. 220, IInd Floor, A Block, High Court
of Delhi, Sher Shah Road, New Delhi-110003. In case objections/reply/written
statements are in regional or vernacular language, true English Translation thereof
should be also attached.

You may cause an appearance on your behalf before the Tribunal on 21°
January, 2019 at 4:30 P.M. in Court Room No. 6, A Block, Delhi High Court, Sher
Shah Road, New Delhi-110003, either through a duly authorized representative or
an instructed Counsel/Advocate, whereafter irrespective of your appearance, the
Tribunal shall proceed as per sub-Section (3) of Section 4 of the Act.

GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Tribunal, High Court of Delhi, Sher Shah Road, New Delhi, this the 27" ay of
November, 2018. / Ys

(J.K, Batra)”
‘ Registrar
eee