[PAGE 1]
THE YOUNG PERSONS (HARMFUL PUBLICATIONS) ACT,

ACT NO. 93 OF 1956

[28th December, 1956.]

An Act to prevent the dissemination of certain publications harmful to
young persons.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventh Year of the Republic
of India as follows:-

1.

Short title, extent and commencement.

1. (1)Short title, extent and commencement. This Act may be
called the Young Persons (Harmful Publications) Act, 1956.

(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.

(3) It shall come into force on such date*1 as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

2.

Definitions.

2.Definitions. In this Act,-

(a) "harmful publication "means any book, magazine, pamphlet, leaflet, newspaper or other like publication which
consists of stories told with the aid of pictures or without
the aid of pictures or wholly in pictures, being stories
portraying wholly or mainly-

(i) the commission of offences; or

(ii) acts of violence or cruelty ; or

(iii) incidents of a repulsive or horrible nature;

in such a way that the publication as a whole would tend to
corrupt a young person into whose hands it might fall,
whether by inciting or encouraging him to commit offences or
acts of violence or cruelty or in any other manner
whatsoever;

[PAGE 2]
(b) " State Government " in relation to a Union territory,
means the administrator thereof;

(c) " young person " means a person under the age of twenty
years.

---------------------------------------------------------------------
1st February, 1957, see Gazette of India, 1957, Extraordinary, Pt. 11,
Sec. 3, p. 331.

703A

Extended to the State of Sikkim vide S.O. 136 (E) dated
28.2.1984.

703B
Extended to and brought into force in Dadra and Nagar Haveli
(w.e.f. 1.7.65) by Reg. 6 of 1963, s. 2 & sch. I.

703C
Extended to the Union territory of Pondicherry by Act 26 of 1968,
S.3 and Schedule.

3.

Penalty for sale, etc., of harmful publications.

3. Penalty for sale, etc., of harmful publications. (1) If a
person-

(a) sells, lets to hire, distributes, publicly exhibits or
in any manner puts into circulation, any harmful publication,
or

(b) for purposes of sale, hire, distribution, public
exhibition or circulation, prints, makes or produces or has
in his possession any harmful publication, or

(c) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that
any harmful publication can be procured from or through any
person,

he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both.

[PAGE 3]
(2) On a conviction under this section, the Court may order the
destruction of all the copies of the harmful publication in respect of
which the conviction was had and which are in the custody of the Court
or remain in the possession or power of the person convicted.

4.

Power of Government to declare harmful publications forfeited.

4. Power of Government to declare harmful publications forfeited. (1) The State Government may, if it is of opinion after consultation with the principal law officer of the State, whether called the
Advocate-General or by any other name, that any publication is, a
harmful publication, declare, by order notified in the Official
Gazette, that every copy of such publication shall be forfeited to the
Government and every such notification shall state the ground for the
order.

(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section
(1) of section 6, where there is an order of forfeiture under subsection (1) in respect of any publication it shall be lawful for any
police officer to seize the same wherever found in the territories to
which this Act extends.

5.

Appeal to High Court against order of forfeiture.

5.Appeal to High Court against order of forfeiture. Any person
aggrieved by an order of forfeiture passed by the State Government
under section 4 may, within sixty days of the date of such order,
apply to the High Court to set aside such order, and upon such
application the High Court may pass such order as it deems fit.

6.

Power to seize and destroy harmful publications.

6. Power to seize and destroy harmful publications. (1) Any
police officer or any other officer empowered in this behalf by the
State Government may seize any harmful publication.

(2)Any Magistrate of the first class may, by warrant, authorize
any police officer not below the rank of sub-inspector to enter and
search any place where any stock of harmful publications may be or may
be reasonably suspected to be, and such police officer may seize any
publication found in such place if in his opinion it is a harmful
publication.

[PAGE 4]
(3) Any publication seized under sub-section (1) shall be produced, as soon as may be, before a Magistrate of the first class, and
any publication seized under sub-section (2) shall be produced, as
soon as may be, before the Court which issued the warrant.

(4) If in the opinion of the Magistrate or Court such
publication is a harmful publication, the Magistrate or Court may
cause it to be destroyed, but if in the opinion of the Magistrate or
Court, such publication is not a harmful publication, the Magistrate
or Court shall dispose of it in the manner provided in sections 523,
524 and 525 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).

7.

Offences under this Act to be cognizable.

7. Offences under this Act to be cognizable. Notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,1898 (5 of 1898).
any offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.