[PAGE 1]
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES ACT, 1963

ACT NO. 20 OF 1963

[10th May, 1963.]

An Act to provide for Legislative Assemblies and
Councils of Ministers for certain Union territories and
for certain other matters.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fourteenth
Year of the Republic of India as follows:--

PART I

PRELIMINARY

Short title and commencement.

1. Short title and commencement. (1) This Act may be
called the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963.

(2) It shall come into force on such date1* as
the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint:

2*[Provided that it shall come into force in the
Union territory of Mizoram on such date, being a date
not earlier than the date of commencement of the
Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act,
1971 (83 of 1971), as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:]

----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Part I, sections 3, 4 and 14 of Part II, Part III, sections 53,
56 and 57 of Part V and First and Second Schedules, so far as they are
applicable, came into force in the Union territory of Goa, Daman and
Diu, on the 13th May, 1963, by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 814, dated 13-5-
1963, see Gazette of India Extraordinary, Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), p. 423
and the remaining provisions of the Act came into force in the Union
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, on 20-12-1963: vide Notifn. No. G.S.R
1922 dt. 16-12-1963, Gaz. of India, Exty., Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), p. 867.
Part I, sections 53, 56 and 57 of Part V and the Second Schedule, so
far as they are applicable, came into force in the Union territory
of Pondicherry of the 13th May, 1963, by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 815, dated
13-5- 1963, see ibid., and the remaining provisions came into force on
the 1st July, 1963, by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 1025, dated 15-6-1963,
see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), p. 471.

[PAGE 2]
All the provisions came into force in the Union territories of
Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura, and so much of the provisions
as apply to the Union territory of Delhi, came into force in that
Union territory, on the 1st July, 1963, by Notifn. No. S.O. 1660,
dated 14-6-1963, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II. Sec.
3(ii), p. 301.

So much of the provisions as apply to the Union territory of
Dadra and Nagar Haveli came into force in that Union territory, on the
1st July, 1963, by Notifn. No. G.S.R. 1025, dated 15-6-1963, see
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), p. 471. Sections 1, 2, 3,
4, 14, 38, 43A and 56 of the Act shall come into force in the Union
Territory of Mizoram on 17-2-1972: vide Notifn. No. G.S.R. 81(E) dated 16-2-
1972, Gaz. of India, Exty., Pt. II, Sec.
3(i),p. 241.

All the provisions of the Act, other than those which have
already come into force in the Union territory of Mizoram, shall, so
far as they are applicable, come into force in that Union territory on
3-51972; vide Notifn. No. G.S.R. 269(E) dated 30-4-1972, Gaz. of
India, Exty., Pt. II, Sec. 3(i), p-....

2. Ins. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 2 (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).

1*[Provided further that it shall come into force
in the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh on such date,
being a date not earlier than the date of commencement of
the Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1975
(29 of 1975), as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:]

2*[Provided also that, subject to the preceding
provisos,] different dates* may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act and for different Union
territories and any reference in any such provision to
the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a
reference to the coming into force of that provision.

Definitions and interpretation.

2. Definitions and interpretation. (1) In this
Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--

(a) "Administrator" means the administrator of
3*[the Union territory] appointed by the President under
artcle 239;

(b) "article" means an article of the
Constitution;

[PAGE 3]
(c) "assembly constituency" means a
constituency provided under this Act for the purpose of
elections to the Legislative Assembly of 3*[the Union
territory] ;

(d) "Election Commission" means the Election
Commission appointed by the President under article 324;

(e) "Judicial Commissioner" includes an
Additional Judicial Commissioner;

(f) "scheduled castes" in relation to
3*[the Union territory] mean such castes, races or
tribes or parts of or groups within such castes, races or
tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be scheduled
castes in relation to that Union territory;

(g) "scheduled tribes" in relation to
3*[the Union territory] mean such tribes or tribal
communities or parts of or groups within such tribes
or tribal communities as are deemed under article 342
to be scheduled tribes in relation to that Union
territory;
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1 Ins. by Act 29 of 1975, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-8-1975).
2 Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "Provided further that" (w.e.f. 15-8-
1975).
*For dates see page 701.
3 Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

1*[(h) "Union territory" means the Union territory of
Pondicherry.]

(2) Any reference in this Act to laws made by Parliament shall be
construed as including a reference to Ordinances promulgated by the
President under article 123 and a reference to Regulations made by the
President under article 240.

PART II

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLIES

Legislative Assemblies for Union territories and
their composition.

3. Legislative Assemblies for Union territories and their
composition. (1) There shall be a Legislative Assembly for each Union

[PAGE 4]
territory.

2*[(2) The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of
1*[the Union territory] to be filled by persons chosen by direct
election shall be thirty.]

(3) The Central Government may nominate not more than three
persons, not being persons in the service of Government, to be members
of the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory].

1*[(4) Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory.]

(5) The number of seats reserved for the scheduled castes or the
scheduled tribes in the Legislative Assembly 3*[of 1*[the Union
territory]] under sub-section (4) shall bear, as nearly as may be, the
same proportion to the total number of seats in the Assembly as the
popu------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
2. Subs. by the State of Himachal Pradesh (Adaptation of Laws on
Union Subjects) Order, 1973, for sub-section (2) (w.e.f. 25-1-1971).
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for "of the Union territory of Pondicherry"
(w.e.f. 30-9-1976).

lation of the scheduled castes in the Union territory or of the
scheduled tribes in the Union territory, as the case may be, in
respect of which seats are so reserved, bears to the total population
of the Union territory.

1*['Explanation.--In this sub-section, the expression
"population" means the population as ascertained at the last preceding
census of which the relevant figures have been published.

Provided that the reference in this Explanation to the last
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been published
shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the
year 2000 have been published, be construed as a reference to the 1971
census.']

2*[(6) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (4), the
reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes in the Legislative
Assembly of the Union territory shall cease to have effect on the same
date on which the reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes in the
House of the People shall cease to have effect under article 334:

Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall affect any
representation in the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
until the dissolution of the then existing Assembly.]

Qualification for membership of Legislative Assembly.

4. Qualification for membership of Legislative Assembly. A person
shall not be qualified to be chosen to fill a seat in the Legislative
Assembly of 2*[the Union territory] unless he--

[PAGE 5]
(a) is a citizen of India and makes and subscribes before
some person authorised in that behalf by the Election
Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form
set out for the purpose in the First Schedule;

(b) is not less than twenty-five years of age; and

(c) possesses such other qualifications as may be prescribed
in that behalf by or under any law.

Duration of Legislative Assemblies.

5. Duration of Legislative Assemblies. The Legislative Assembly
of 2*[the Union territory], unless sooner dissolved, shall continue
for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no
longer, and the expiration of the said period of five years shall
operate as a dissolution of the Assembly:

Provided that the said period may, while a Proclamation of
Emergency issued under clause (1) of article 352 is in operation, be
extended by the President by order for a period not exceeding one year
at a time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months
after the Proclamation has ceased to operate.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Ins by Act 19 of 1984, s. 2.
2. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

Sessions of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.

6. Sessions of Legislative Assembly, prorogation and dissolution.
(1) The Administrator shall, from time to time, summon the Legislative
Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but six
months shall not intervene between its last sitting in one session and
the date appointed for its first sitting in the next session.

(2) The Administrator may, from time to time,--

(a) prorogue the Assembly;

(b) dissolve the Assembly.

Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly.

7. Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Legislative Assembly. (1) Every
Legislative Assembly shall, as soon as may be, choose two members of
the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof
and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker becomes
vacant, the Assembly shall choose another member to be Speaker or
Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.

(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Speaker of an

[PAGE 6]
Assembly--

(a) shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of
the Assembly;

(b) may at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if
such member is the Speaker, to the Deputy Speaker, and
if such member is the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker,
resign his office;

(c) may be removed from his office by a resolution of the
Assembly passed by a majority of all the then members
of the Assembly:

Provided that no resolution for the purpose of clause (c) shall
be moved unless at least fourteen days' notice has been given of the
intention to move the resolution:

Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the
Speaker shall not vacate his office until immediately before the first
meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution.

(3) While the office of Speaker is vacant, the duties of the
office shall be performed by the Deputy Speaker or, if the office of
Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Assembly as may
be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.

(4) During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the
Assembly, the Deputy Speaker, or, if he is also absent, such person as
may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly, or, if no
such person is present, such other person as may be determined by the
Assembly, shall act as Speaker.

(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly such salaries and allowances as may be
respectively fixed by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
by law and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries
and allowances as the Administrator may, with the approval of the
President, by order determine.

Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a
resolution for his removal from office is under
consideration.

8. Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to preside while a resolution
for his removal from office is under consideration. (1) At any sitting
of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the removal of
the Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or
while any resolution for the removal of the Deputy Speaker from his
office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker, shall not, though
he is present, preside and the provisions of sub-section (4) of
section 7 shall apply in relation to every such sitting as they apply
in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker or, as the case may
be, the Deputy Speaker is absent.

[PAGE 7]
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise
to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly while any
resolution for his removal from office is under consideration in the
Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 12, be
entitled to vote only in the first instance on such resolution or on
any other matter during such proceedings but not in the case of an
equality of votes.

Right of Administrator to address and send messages to
Legislative Assembly.

9. Right of Administrator to address and send messages to
Legislative Assembly. (1) The Administrator may address the
Legislative Assembly and may for that purpose require the attendance
of members.

(2) The Administrator may also send messages to the Assembly
whether with respect to a Bill then pending in the Assembly or
otherwise, and when a message is so sent, the Assembly shall with all
convenient dispatch consider any matter required by the message to be
taken into consideration.

Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly.

10. Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembly. Every
Minister shall have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part
in the proceedings of, the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory, and to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the
proceedings of, any committee of the Legislative Assembly of which he
may be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this section be
entitled to vote.

Oath or affirmation by members.

11. Oath or affirmation by members. Every member of the
Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] shall, before taking
his seat, make and subscribe before the Administrator, or some person
appointed in that behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to
the form set out for the purpose in the First Schedule.

[PAGE 8]
Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act
notwithstanding vacancies and quorum.

12. Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwithstanding
vacancies and quorum. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all
questions at any sitting of the Legislative Assembly of *[the Union
territory] shall

* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting
other than the Speaker or person acting as such.

(2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the
first instance but shall have and exercise a casting vote in the case
of an equality of votes.

(3) The Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] shall
have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the membership
thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly of a 1*[the
Union territory] shall be valid notwithstanding that it is discovered
subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do, sat or
voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.

(4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Legislative
Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] shall be one-third of the total
number of members of the Assembly.

(5) If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly
of 1*[the Union territory] there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of
the Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the Assembly
or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.

Vacation of seats.

13. Vacation of seats. (1) No person shall be a member both of
Parliament and of the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory]
and if a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of such
Assembly, then, at the expiration of such period as may be specified
in the rules made by the President, that person's seat in Parliament
shall become vacant, unless he has previously resigned his seat in the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory.

(2) If a member of the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union
territory]--

(a) becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in
2*[section 14 or section 14A] for membership of the
Assembly, or

(b) resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to
the Speaker,

[PAGE 9]
his seat shall thereupon become vacant.

(3) If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative
Assembly of 1*[the union territory] is without permission of the
Assembly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly may declare
his seat vacant:

Provided that in computing the said period of sixty days, no
account shall be taken of any period during which the Assembly is
prorogued or is adjourned for more than four consecutive days.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
2. Subs. by Act 24 of 1985, s. 2.

Disqualifications for membership.

14. Disqualifications for membership. (1) A person shall be
disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of the
Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory]--

(a) if he holds any office of profit under the Government of
India or the Government of any State or the Government
of 1*[the Union territory] other than an office
declared by law made by Parliament or by the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory not to
disqualify its holder; or

(b) if he is for the time being disqualified for being
chosen as, and for being, a member of either House of
Parliament under the provisions of sub-clause (b), subclause (c) or sub-clause (d) of clause (1) of article
102 or of any law made in pursuance of that article.

(2) For the purposes of this section, a person shall not be
deemed to hold an office of profit under the Government of India or
the Government of any State or the Government of 1*[the Union
territory] by reason only that he is a Minister either for the Union
or for such State or Union territory.

(3) If any question arises as to whether a member of the
Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] has become
disqualified for being such a member under the provisions of subsection (1), the question shall be referred for the decision of the
President and his decision shall be final.

(4) Before giving any decision on any such question, the
President shall obtain the opinion of the Election Commission and
shall act according to such opinion.

Disqualification on ground of defection for being a member.

[PAGE 10]
2*[14A. Disqualification on ground of defection for being a
member. The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the Constitution
shall, subject to the necessary modifications (including modifications
for construing references therein to the Legislative Assembly of a
State, article 188, article 194 and article 212 as references,
respectively, to the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory],
section 11, section 16 and section 37 of this Act), apply to and in
relation to the members of the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union
territory] as they apply to and in relation to the members of the
Legislative Assembly of a State, and accordingly,--

(a) the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed
to form part of this Act; and

(b) a person shall be disqualified for being a member of the
Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] if he is so
disqualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified.]

Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or
affirmation of when not qualified or when disqualified.

15. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or
affirmation or when not qualified or when disqualified. If a person
sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union
territory] before he has complied with the requirements of section 11
or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is disqualified
for membership thereof, he shall be liable in respect of each day on
which he so sits or votes to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be
recovered as a debt due to the Union.

Powers, privileges, etc., of members.

16. Powers, privileges, etc., of members. (1) Subject to the
provisions of this Act and to the rules and standing orders regulating
the procedure of the Legislative Assembly, there shall be freedom of
speech in the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory].

(2) No member of the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union
territory] shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect
of anything said or any vote given by him in the Assembly or any
committee thereof, and no person shall be so liable in respect of the
publication
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
2. Ins. by Act 24 of 1985, s. 3.

by or under the authority of such Assembly of any report, paper, votes
or proceedings.

(3) In other respects, the powers, privileges and immunities of

[PAGE 11]
the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] and of the members
and the committees thereof shall be such as are for the time being
enjoyed by the House of the People and its members and committees.

(4) The provisions of sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall apply
in relation to persons who by virtue of this Act have the right to
speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the
Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] or any committee
thereof as they apply in relation to members of that Assembly.

Salaries and allowances of members.

17. Salaries and allowances of members. Members of the
Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] shall be entitled to
receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be
determined by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory by law
and, until provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries and
allowances as the Administrator may, with the approval of the
President, by order determine.

Extent of legislative power.

18. Extent of legislative power. (1) Subject to the provisions of
this Act, the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] may make
laws for the whole or any part of the Union territory with respect to
any of the matters enumerated in the State List or the Concurrent List
in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution in so far as any such
matter is applicable in relation to Union territories.

(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall derogate from the powers
conferred on Parliament by the Constitution to make laws with respect
to any matter for 1*[the Union territory] or any part thereof.

Exemption of property of the Union from taxation.

19. Exemption of property of the Union from taxation. The
property of the Union shall, save in so far as Parliament may by law
otherwise provide, be exempted from all taxes imposed by or under any
law made by the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] or by
or under any other law in force in 1*[the Union territory]:

Provided that nothing in this section shall, until Parliament by
law otherwise provides, prevent any authority within 1*[the Union
territory] from levying any tax on any property of the Union to which
such property was immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution liable or treated as liable, so long as that tax
continues to be levied in that Union territory.

[PAGE 12]
Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly with
respect to certain matters.

20. Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly with
respect to certain matters. 2*[1] The provisions of article 286,
article 287 and article 288 shall apply in relation to any law passed
by the Legislative Assembly of
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65 (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).
2. S. 20 renumbered as sub-section (1) thereof by Act 83 of 1971, s.
5 (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).

1*[the Union territory] with respect to any of the matters referred to
in those articles as they apply in relation to any law passed by the
Legislature of a State with respect to those matters.

2*[(2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary
modifications, apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislative
Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] with respect to any of the matters
referred to in that article as they apply in relation to any law
passed by the Legislature of a State with respect to those matters.]

Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and
laws made
By Legislative Assembly.

3*[21. Inconsistency between laws made by Parliament and laws
made by Legislative Assembly. If any provision of a law made by the
Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] with respect to any
matter enumerated in the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution is repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament
with respect to that matter, whether passed before or after the law
made by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory, or, if any
provision of a law made by the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union
territory] with respect to any matter enumerated in the Concurrent
List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution is repugnant to any
provision of any earlier law, other than a law made by the Legislative
Assembly of the Union territory, with respect to that matter, then, in
either case, the law made by Parliament, or, as the case may be, such
earlier law shall prevail and the law made by the Legislative Assembly
of the Union territory shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be
void:

Provided that if such law made by the Legislative Assembly of the
Union territory has been reserved for the consideration of the
President and has received his assent, such law shall prevail in that
Union territory:

Provided further that nothing in this section shall prevent

[PAGE 13]
Parliament from enacting at any time any law with respect to the same
matter including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the
law so made by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory.]

Sanction of the administrator required for certain
legislative proposals.

22. Sanction of the administrator required for certain
legislative proposals. No Bill or amendment shall be introduced into,
or moved in, the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory]
without the previous sanction of the Administrator, if such Bill or
amendment makes provision with respect to any of the following
matters, namely:--

(a) constitution and organisation of the court of the
Judicial Commissioner;
----------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "Union territory" (w.e.f.
30-5-1987).
2. Ins. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 5 (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).
3. Subs. by Act 29 of 1975, s. 4, for s. 21 (w.e.f. 15-8-1975).

(b) jurisdiction and powers of the court of the Judicial
Commissioner with respect to any of the matters in the
State List or the Concurrent list in the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution.

Special provisions as to financial Bills.

23. Special provisions as to financial Bills. (1) A Bill or
amendment shall not be introduced into, or moved in, the Legislative
Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] except on the recommendation of
the Administrator, if such Bill or amendment makes provision for any
of the following matters, namely:--

(a) the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or
regulation of any tax;

(b) the amendment of the law with respect to any financial
obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the
Government of the Union territory;

(c) the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of the Union territory;

(d) the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure
charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory
or the increasing of the amount of any such
expenditure;

(*)e)the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated
Fund of the Union territory or the public account of
the Union territory or the custody or issue of such

[PAGE 14]
money or the audit of the accounts of the Union
territory;

Provided that no recommendation shall be required under this subsection for the moving of an amendment making provision for the
reduction or abolition of any tax.

(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for
any of the matters aforesaid by reason only that it provides for the
imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or
payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by
reason that it provides for the imposition, abolition, remission,
alteration or regulation of any tax by any local authority or body for
local purposes.

(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would
involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of **[the Union
territory] shall not be passed by the Legislative Assembly of the
Union territory unless the Administrator has recommended to that
Assembly the consideration of the Bill.

* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, "for Union territory"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

(**)substituted by Act 38 of 2001 w.e.f 10.05.06.

Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.

24. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills. (1) A Bill pending in the
Legislative Assembly of *[the Union territory] shall not lapse by
reason of the prorogation of the Assembly.

(2) A Bill which is pending in the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the
Union territory] shall lapse on a dissolution of the Assembly.

*Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory" (w.e.f.
30-5-1987).
Assent to Bills.

2*[25. Assent to Bills.-- When a Bill has been passed by the
Legislative Assembly of *[the Union territory], it shall be presented
to the Administrator and the Administrator shall declare either that
he assents to the Bill or that he withholds assent therefrom or that
he reserves the Bill for the consideration of the President:

Provided that the Administrator may, as soon as possible after
the presentation of the Bill to him for assent, return the Bill if it
is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting that the
Assembly will reconsider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof,
and, in particular, will consider the desirability of introducing any
such amendments as he may recommend in his message and, when a Bill is
so returned, the Assembly will reconsider the Bill accordingly, and if
the Bill is passed again with or without amendment and presented to
the Administrator for assent, the Administrator shall declare either

[PAGE 15]
that he assents to the Bill or that he reserves the Bill for the
consideration of the President:

Provided further that the Administrator shall not assent to, but
shall reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which,-

(a) in the opinion of the Administrator would, if it became
law, so derogate from the powers of the High Court as
to endanger the position which that Court is, by the
Constitution, designed to fill; or

(b) relates to any of the matters specified in clause (1) of
article 31A; or

(c) the President may, by order, direct to be reserved for
his consideration; or

(d) relates to matters referred to in sub-section (5) or
section 7 or section 17 or section 34 or sub-section
(6) of section 45 or in entry 1 or entry 2 of the State
List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution:

*. Subs. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 7, for s. 25 (w.e.f. 16-2-
1972).

Provided also that without prejudice to the provisions of the
second proviso, the Administrator shall not assent to, but shall
reserve for the consideration of the President, any Bill which has
been passed by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of
Mizoram and which relates to any area comprised in any autonomous
district in that Union territory under the Sixth Schedule to the
Constitution.

Explanation.--For the purposes of this section and section 25A, a
Bill shall be deemed to be a Money Bill if it contains only provisions
dealing with all or any of the matters specified in sub-section (1) of
section 23 or any matter incidental to any of those matters and, in
either case, there is endorsed thereon the certificate of the Speaker
of the Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.

Bills reserved for consideration.

25A. Bills reserved for consideration.-- When a Bill is reserved
by an Administrator for the consideration of the President, the
President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill or that he
withholds assent therefrom:

Provided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President
may direct the Administrator to return the Bill to the Legislative
Assembly together with such a message as is mentioned in the first
proviso to section 25 and, when a Bill is so returned, the Assembly
shall reconsider it accordingly within a period of six months from the
date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the
Assembly with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the

[PAGE 16]
President for his consideration.]

Requirements as to sanction and recommendations
to be regarded as matters of procedure only.

26. Requirements as to sanction and recommendations to be
regarded as matters of procedure only.-- No Act of the Legislative
Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] no provision in any such Act,
shall be invalid by reason only that some previous sanction or
recommendation required by this Act was not given, if assent to that
Act was given 2*[by the Administrator, or, on being reserved by the
Administrator for the consideration of the President, by the
President].

Annual financial statement.

27. Annual financial statement.-- (1) The Administrator of each
Union territory shall in respect of every financial year cause to be
laid before the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory, with the
previous approval of the President, a statement of the estimated
receipts and expenditure of the Union territory for that year, in this
Part referred to as the "annual financial statement".

(2) The estimates of expenditure embodied in the annual financial
statement shall show separately--

(a) the sums required to meet expenditure described by this
Act as expenditure charged upon the Consolidated Fund
of the Union territory, and

(b) the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to
be made from the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory;

and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other
expenditure.

(3) The following expenditure shall be expenditure charged on the
Consolidated Fund of each Union territory:--

(a) the emoluments and allowances of the Administrator and
other expenditure relating to his office as determined
by the President by general or special order;

(b) the charges payable in respect of loans advanced to the
Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India
including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption
charges, and other expenditure connected therewith;

(c) the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the

[PAGE 17]
Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly;

(d) expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of
a Judicial Commissioner;

(e) any sums required to satisfy any judgment, decree or
award of any court or arbitral tribunal;

(f) expenditure incurred by the Administrator in the
discharge of his special responsibility;

(g) any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by
law made by Parliament or by the Legislative Assembly
of the Union territory to be so charged.

Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to
estimates.

28. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to
estimates.-- (1) So much of the estimates as relates to expenditure
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of 1*[the Union territory] shall
not be submitted to the vote of the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the
Union territory], but nothing in this sub-section shall be construed
as preventing the discussion in the Legislative Assembly of any of
those estimates.

(2) So much of the said estimates as relates to other expenditure
shall be submitted in the form of demands for grants to the
Legislative Assembly, and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to
assent, or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any
demand subject to a reduction of the amount specified therein.

(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the
recommendation of the Administrator.

Appropriation Bills.

29. Appropriation Bills.-- (1) As soon as may be after the grants
under section 28 have been made by the Assembly, there shall be
introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory of all moneys required to
meet--

(a) the grants so made by the Assembly, and

(b) the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the
Union territory but not exceeding in any case the
amount shown in the statement previously laid before
the Assembly.

[PAGE 18]
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the
Legislative Assembly which will have the effect of varying the amount
or altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the
amount of any expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the
Union territory and the decision of the person presiding as to whether
an amendment is inadmissible under this sub-section shall be final.

(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no money shall
be withdrawn from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory except
under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the
provisions of this section.

Supplementary, additional or excess grants.

30. Supplementary, additional or excess grants.-- (1) The
Administrator shall--

(a) if the amount authorised by any law made in accordance
with the provisions of section 29 to be expended for a
particular service for the current financial year is
found to be insufficient for the purposes of that year
or when a need has arisen during the current financial
year for supplementary or additional expenditure upon
some new service not contemplated in the annual
financial statement for that year, or

(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a
financial year in excess of the amount granted for that
service and for that year,

cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory, with the previous approval of the President, another
statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to
be presented to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory with
such previous approval a demand for such excess, as the case may be.

(2) The provisions of sections 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in
relation to any such statement and expenditure or demand and also to
any law to be made authorising the appropriation of moneys out of the
Consolidated Fund of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or
the grant in respect of such demand as they have effect in relation to
the annual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein
or to a demand for a grant and the law to be made for the
authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of the Union territory to meet such expenditure or grant.

Votes on account.

31. Votes on account.--(1) Notwithstanding anything in the
foregoing provisions of this Part, the Legislative Assembly of *[the

[PAGE 19]
Union territory] shall have power to make any grant in advance in
respect of the estimated expenditure for a part of any financial
year pending the completion of the procedure prescribed in
section 28 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in
accordance with the provisions of section 29 in relation to that
expenditure and the Legislative Assembly shall have power to
authorise by law the withdrawal of moneys from the Consolidated
Fund of the Union territory for the purposes for which
the said grant is made.

* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in
relation to the making of any grant under sub-section (1) or to any
law to be made under that sub-section as they have effect in relation
to the making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in
the annual financial statement and the law to be made for the
authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund
of the Union territory to meet such expenditure.

Authorisation of expenditure pending its
sanction by Legislative Assembly.

32. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by
Legislative Assembly.-- Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing
provisions of this Part, the Administrator may authorise such
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory as he
deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning
with the date of the constitution of the Consolidated Fund of the
Union territory, pending the sanction of such expenditure by the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory.

Rules of procedure.

33. Rules of procedure.-- (1) The Legislative Assembly of *[the
union territory] may make rules for regulating, subject to the
provisions of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business:

Provided that the Administrator shall, after consultation with
the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly and with the approval of the
President, make rules--

(a) for securing the timely completion of financial
business;

(b) for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of
business in, the Legislative Assembly in relation to
any financial matter or to any Bill for the
appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of

[PAGE 20]
the Union territory;

(c) for prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of
questions on, any matter which affects the discharge of
the functions of the Administrator in so far as he is
required by this Act to act in his discretion.

(2) Until rules are made under sub-section (1), the rules of
procedure and standing orders with respect to the Legislative Assembly
of the State of Uttar Pradesh in force immediately before the
commencement of this Act in 1*[the Union territory] shall have effect
in relation to the Legislative Assembly of that Union territory
subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein
by the Administrator.

* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

Official language or languages of Union
territory and language or languages to be used in
Legislative Assembly thereof.

34. Official language or languages of Union territory and
language or languages to be used in Legislative Assembly thereof.--(1)
The Legislative Assembly of *[the Union territory] may by law adopt
any one or more of the languages in use in the Union territory or
Hindi as the official language or languages to be used for all or any
of the official purposes of the Union territory:

Provided that so long as the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory of Pondicherry does not decide otherwise, the French
language shall continue to be used as an official language of that
Union territory for the same official purposes for which it was being
used in that territory immediately before the commencement of this
Act:

Provided further that the President may be order direct--

(i) that the official language of the Union shall be adopted
for such of the official purposes of the Union
territory as may be specified in the order;

(ii) that any other language shall also be adopted
throughout the Union territory or such part thereof for
such of the official purposes of the Union territory as
may be specified in the order, if the President is
satisfied that a substantial proportion of the
population of the Union territory desires the use of
that other language for all or any of such purposes.

(2) The business in the Legislative Assembly of *[the Union
territory] shall be transacted in the official language or languages
of the Union territory or in Hindi or in English:

[PAGE 21]
Provided that the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or person
acting as such, as the case may be, may permit any member who cannot
adequately express himself in any of the languages aforesaid to address
the Assembly in his mother-tongue.

* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory".

Language to be used for Acts, Bills, etc.

35. Language to be used for Acts, Bills, etc.-- Notwithstanding
anything contained in section 34, until Parliament by law otherwise
provides, the authoritative texts--

(a) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to
be moved in the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union
territory],

(b) of all Acts passed by the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the
Union territory], and

(c) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye-laws issued
under any law made by the Legislative Assembly of
1*[the Union territory],

shall be in the English language:

Provided that where the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union
territory] has prescribed any language other than the English language
for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislative
Assembly of the Union territory or in any order, rule, regulation or
bye-law issued under any law made by the Legislative Assembly of the
Union territory, a translation of the same in the English language
published under the authority of the Administrator in the Official
Gazette shall be deemed to be the authoritative text thereof in the
English language.

* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

Restriction on discussion in the Legislative
Assembly.

36. Restriction on discussion in the Legislative Assembly.-- No
discussion shall take place in the Legislative Assembly of 1*[the
Union territory] with respect to the conduct of any Judicial
Commissioner or of any judge of the Supreme Court or of a High Court
in the discharge of his duties.

[PAGE 22]
* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

Courts not to inquire into proceedings of
Legislative Assembly.

37. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Legislative
Assembly.-- (1) The validity of any proceedings in the Legislative
Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] shall not be called in question on
the ground of any alleged irregularity of procedure.

(2) No officer or member of the Legislative *[the Union
territory] in whom powers are vested by or under this Act for
regulating procedure or the conduct of business, or for maintaining
order in the Legislative Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction
of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those powers.

* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

PART III

DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES

Definitions.

38. Definitions.-- In this Part, unless the context otherwise
requires,--

(a) "associate member" means a member associated with the
Delimitation Commission under section 42 1*[or with the
Election Commission 2*[under section 43A or section
43C]];

(b) "Delimitation Commission" means the Delimitation
Commission constituted under section 3 of the
Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 (61 of 1962);

1*[(bb) "Election Commission" means the Election Commission
appointed by the President under article 324;]

(c) "latest census figures" mean the census figures in
3*[the Union territory] ascertained at the latest
census of which the finally published figures are
available;

[PAGE 23]
(d) "parliamentary constituency" means a constituency
provided by law for the purpose of elections to the
House of the People from 3**[the Union territory]
including the Union territory of Delhi.

*. Ins. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 9 (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).

** Subs. by Act 29 of 1975, s. 7, for "under section
43A" (w.e.f. 15-8-1975).

Assembly constituencies.

39. Assembly constituencies.-- For the purpose of elections to
the Legislative Assembly of 3*[the Union territory], the Union
territory shall be divided into single-member assembly constituencies
in accordance with the provisions of this Part in such manner that the
population of each of the constituencies shall, so far as practicable,
be the same throughout the Union territory.

* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

Representation of Pondicherry in the House of the
People.

40. Representation of Pondicherry in the House of the People.--
There shall be allotted one seat to the Union territory of Pondicherry
in the House of the People and that Union territory shall form one
parliamentary constituency.

Duties of Delimitation Commission.

41. Duties of Delimitation Commission.-- (1) It shall be the duty
of the Delimitation Commission--

(a) to delimit the assembly constituencies in each Union
territory, and

(b) to determine, on the basis of the latest census figures,
the number of seats to be reserved for the scheduled
castes and for the scheduled tribes in the Legislative
Assembly of *[the Union territory] other than the
Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu, and the
constituencies in which these seats shall be so
reserved.

*Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union
territory" (w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

[PAGE 24]
(2) It shall also be the duty of the Delimitation Commission--

(a) to readjust, on the basis of the latest census figures,
the division of each of the Union territories of Delhi,
Himachal Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura into
parliamentary constituencies, *[the number being 7, 4,
2 and 2];

* Subs. by Act 19 of 1966, s. 37, for certain words
(w.e.f. 13-6- 1966).

(b) to determine the constituency in which the seat shall be
reserved for the scheduled castes or for the scheduled
tribes, as the case may be; and

(c) to divide the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu into
two single-member parliamentary constituencies.

Associate members.

42. Associate members. (1) For the purpose of assisting the
Delimitation Commission in its duties, the Delimitation Commission
shall associate with itself,--

(a) in respect of the Union territory of Delhi, all the
members of the House of the People representing that
Union territory;

(b) in respect of each of the Union territories of Himachal
Pradesh, Manipur and Tripura, all the members of the
House of the People representing that Union territory
and three members of the Legislative Assembly of that
Union territory to be nominated by the Speaker of the
Assembly from among the members thereof;

(c) in respect of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu,
the two members of the House of the People representing
that Union territory;

(d) in respect of the Union territory of Pondicherry, three
members of the Legislative Assembly of that Union
territory to be nominated by the Speaker of the
Assembly from among the members thereof.

(2) The nomination of members of the several Legislative
Assemblies under sub-section (1) shall be made by the respective
Speakers thereof as soon as practicable and shall be communicated to
the Delimitation Commission.

(3) If owing to death or resignation the office of an associate
member falls vacant, it shall be filled as soon as practicable under
and in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this section.

[PAGE 25]
(4) None of the associate members shall have the right to vote or
to sign any decision of the Delimitation Commission.

Procedure as to delimitation.

43. Procedure as to delimitation.-- The provisions of sections 7,
9, 10 and 11 of the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962 (61 of 1962),
shall apply, as far as may be, in relation to the delimitation of
parliamentary and assembly constituencies under this Part as they
apply in relation to the delimitation of parliamentary and assembly
constituencies under that Act.

Special provision for delimitation of
constituencies of
Mizoram Legislative Assembly.

1*[43A. Special provision for delimitation of constituencies of
Mizoram Legislative Assembly.-- (1) The provisions of sections 39 to
43 (both inclusive) shall not apply to the delimitation of
constituencies for the purpose of elections to the Legislative
Assembly of the Union territory of Mizoram.

1*. Ins. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 10 (w.e.f. 16-2-1972).

(2) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein provided,
distribute the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory of Mizoram under sub-section (2) of section 3 to single
member assembly constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the
latest census figures having regard to the provisions of the
Constitution and to the following provisions:--

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be
geographically compact areas;

(b) in delimiting the constituencies, regard shall be had to
physical features, existing boundaries of
administrative units, facilities of communication and
public convenience.

(3) For the purpose of assisting in the performance of its
functions under sub-section (2), the Election Commission shall
associate with itself as associate members--

(a) all the persons who, having been elected to the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Assam from the
Lungleh, Aijal East and Aijal West territorial
constituencies, are members of that Assembly
immediately before the day appointed under clause (b)
of section 2 of the North-Eastern Areas
(Reorganisation) Act, 1971 (81 of 1971); and

[PAGE 26]
(b) such three elected members of the District Council of
the Mizo District as the Chairman thereof may nominate:

Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to
vote or sign any decision of the Election Commission.

(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate
member falls vacant, it shall be filled, if practicable, in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (3).

(5) The Election Commission shall--

(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of
constituencies, together with the dissenting proposals,
if any, of any associate member who desires publication
thereof in the Official Gazette and in such other
manner as the Commission
---------------------------------------------------------------------

may consider fit, together with a notice inviting
objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals
and specifying a date on or after which the proposals
will be further considered by it;

(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have
been received by it before the date so specified;

(c) after consideration of objections and suggestions which
may have been received by it before the date so
specified, determine by one or more orders the
delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or
orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and
upon such publication, the order or orders shall have
the full force of law and shall not be called in
question in any court.

(6) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by
notification in the Official Gazette,--

(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under
sub-section (5) or any error arising therein from
inadvertent slip or omission;

(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division
mentioned in any such order or orders are or is
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-todate.

(7) Every order made under sub-section (5) and every notification
issued under sub-section (6) shall be laid as soon as may be after it
is made or issued before the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory of Mizoram.

(8) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement
of this Act in the Union territory of Mizoram with a view to

[PAGE 27]
delimiting the territorial constituencies of that Union territory for
purposes of elections to the Legislative Assembly of that Union
territory shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the
foregoing provisions of this section, be deemed to have been done or
taken under those provisions as if those provisions were in force at
the time such things were done or such steps were taken.]

Representation of Arunachal Pradesh in the House of the
people.

1*[43B. Representation of Arunachal Pradesh in the House of the
people. In the House of the People to be constituted after the general
election to that House to be held after the commencement of the
Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Act, 1975 (29 of 1975)
and thereafter, there shall be allotted two seats to the Union
territory of Arunachal Pradesh and the First Schedule to the
Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) shall be deemed
to have been amended accordingly.

1* Ins. by Act 29 of 1975, s. 8 (w.e.f. 15-8-1975).

Special provisions for delimitation of parliamentary
constituencies in Arunachal Pradesh and constituencies of
Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly.

43C. Special provisions for delimitation of parliamentary
constituencies in Arunachal Pradesh and constituencies of Arunachal
Pradesh Legislative Assembly. (1) The provisions of sections 39 to 43
(both inclusive) shall not apply to the delimitation of parliamentary
constituencies in the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh or to the
delimitation of constituencies for the purpose of elections to the
Legislative Assembly of that Union territory.

(2) The Election Commission shall divide the Union territory of
Arunachal Pradesh into two single-member parliamentary constituencies
on the basis of the latest census figures.

(3) The Election Commission shall also, in the manner herein
provided, distribute the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of
the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh under sub-section (2) of
section 3 to single-member assembly constituencies and delimit them on
the basis of the latest census figures having regard to the following
provisions:--

(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be
geographically compact areas;

(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to
fall only within one parliamentary constituency;

(c) in delimiting the constituencies, regard shall be had to
physical features, existing boundaries of

[PAGE 28]
administrative units facilities of communication and
public convenience.

(4) For the purpose of assisting in the performance of its
functions under sub-sections (2) and (3), the Election Commission
shall associate with itself as associate members--

(a) the member of the House of the People representing the
Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh;

(b) such five members of the Legislative Assembly of the
Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh as the Speaker of
that Assembly shall, having regard to the composition
of the Legislative Assembly, nominate:

Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to
vote or sign any decision of the Election Commission.

(5) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate
member falls vacant, it shall be filled, if practicable, in accordance
with the provisions of sub-section (4).

(6) The Election Commission shall--

(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of
constituencies together with the dissenting proposals,
if any, of any associate member who desires publication
thereof in the Official Gazette and in such other
manner as the Commission may consider fit, together
with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in
relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or
after which the proposals will be further considered by
it;

(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have
been received by it before the date so specified;

(c) after consideration of objections and suggestions which
may have been received by it before the date so
specified, determine by one or more orders the
delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or
orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and
upon such publication, the order or orders shall have
the full force of law and shall not be called in
question in any court.

(7) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by
notification in the Official Gazette,--

(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under
sub-section (6) or any error arising therein from
inadvertent slip or omission;

(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division
mentioned in any such order or orders are or is
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-

[PAGE 29]
date.

(8) Every order made under sub-section (6) and every notification
issued under sub-section (7) shall be laid as soon as may be after
it is made or issued before the House of the People and
the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.

(9) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement
of this Act in the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh with a view to
delimiting the territorial constituencies of that Union territory for
purposes of elections to the Legislative Assembly of that Union
territory shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the
foregoing provisions of this section, be deemed to have been done or
taken under those provisions as if these provisions were in force at
the time such things were done or such steps were taken.]

Special provision for determination of
constituencies in
The Legislative Assembly of Goa, Daman and Diu for
Scheduled Castes
And Scheduled Tribes.

1*[43D. Special provision for determination of constituencies in
the Legislative Assembly of Goa, Daman and Diu for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes. (1) The Election Commission shall determine on
the basis of the latest census figures--

(i) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and for the Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative
Assembly of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and
Diu (hereafter in this section referred to as the
Legislative Assembly) having regard to the provisions
of sub-section (5) of section 3; and

(ii) the constituencies in which those seats shall be so
reserved having regard to the provisions of clause (c),
or, as the case may be, clause (d), of sub-section (1)
of section 9 of the Delimitation Act and without
altering the extent of any constituency as delimited by
the Delimitation Commission.

1* Ins. by Act 86 of 1976, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30-9-1976).

(2) The Election Commission shall--

(a) publish its proposals for the determination of the
constituencies in which seats shall be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes, as the
case may be, in the Gazette of India and in the
Official Gazette of the Union territory of Goa, Daman
and Diu and also in such other manner as the Election
Commission may consider fit, together with a notice

[PAGE 30]
inviting objections and suggestions in relation to the
proposals and specifying a date on or after which the
proposals will be further considered by it;

(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have
been received by it before the date so specified;

(c) after consideration of objections and suggestions which
may have been received by it before the date so
specified, determine by one or more orders the number
of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for
the Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, in the
Legislative Assembly and the constituencies in which
those seats shall be so reserved and cause such order
or orders to be published in the Gazette of India and
in the Official Gazette of the Union territory of Goa,
Daman and Diu; and upon such publication in the Gazette
of India, the order or orders shall have the full force
of law and shall not be called in question in any court
and the Second Schedule to the Representation of the
People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) and the order made by
the Delimitation Commission under section 9 of the
Delimitation Act in relation to the Legislative
Assembly shall be deemed to have been amended
accordingly.

(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), the readjustment of representation of any territorial constituencies in the
Legislative Assembly necessitated by any order made by the Election
Commission under this section, shall apply in relation to every
election to the Legislative Assembly held after the publication in the
Gazette of India, under sub-section (2), of such order.

(4) Nothing contained in the foregoing sub-sections shall affect
the representation in the Legislative Assembly existing on the date of
publication in the Gazette of India, under sub-section (2), of any
order made by the Election Commission.

(5) The Election Commission may, from time to time, by
notification in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of
the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu--

(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under
sub-section (2) or any error arising therein from
inadvertent slip or omission;

(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division
mentioned in any such order are, or is, altered, make
such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient for bringing such order up-to-date.

(6) Every order made under sub-section (2) and every notification
issued under sub-section (5) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after
it is made or issued before the Legislative Assembly.

Explanation.--In this section,--

[PAGE 31]
(a) "Delimitation Act" means the Delimitation Act, 1972 (76
of 1972);

(b) "Delimitation Commission" means the Delimitation
Commission constituted under section 3 of the
Delimitation Act.]

Special provision as to readjustment of territorial
constituencies.

43E*. Special provisions as to readjustment of territorial
constituencies. Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 38 to
43D (both inclusive), until the relevant figures for the first census
taken after the year 2026 have been published, it shall not be
necessary to readjust the division of each Union territory into
territorial constituencies and any reference to the "latest census
figures" in this Part shall be construed as a reference to the
2001** census figures.]

[* inserted by Act, 19 of 1984 S.3 w.e.f. 1.3.1984
** substituted by Act 19 of 2005 w.e.f.21.05.2005]

43F+. Notwithstanding the publication of orders under subsection of section 10 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 or anything
containing in sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) of the said section,
any readjustment in the division of Union territory into territorial
constituencies by the Delimitation Commission under the said Act, on
the basis of 2001 census shall take effect from such date as the
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette,
specify and until such readjustment takes effect, any election to the
Legislative Assembly may be held on the basis of the territorial
constituencies existing before such readjustment.

[+inserted by Act of 2006]

PART IV

COUNCIL OF MINISTERS

44. Council of Ministers. (1) There shall be a Council of
Ministers in each Union territory with the Chief Minister at the head
to aid and advise the Administrator in the exercise of his functions
in relation to matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly
of the Union territory has power to make laws except in so far as he
is required by or under this Act to act in his discretion or by or
under any law to exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions:

Provided that, in case of difference of opinion between the
Administrator and his Ministers on any matter, the Administrator shall
refer it to the President for decision and act according to the
decision given thereon by the President, and pending such decision it
shall be competent for the Administrator in any case where the matter

[PAGE 32]
is in his opinion so urgent that it is necessary for him to take
immediate action, to take such action or to give such direction in the
matter as he deems necessary:

2* * * * *
* The second proviso omitted by Act 34 of 1986

(2) Omitted by Act 34 and 69 of 1986 respectively s. 41
(w.e.f. 20-2-1987).

(3) If and in so far as any special responsibility of the
Administrator is involved under this Act, he shall, in the exercise of
his functions, act in his discretion.

(4) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not
a matter as respects which the Administrator is by or under this Act
required to act in his discretion, the decision of the Administrator
thereon shall be final.

(5) If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not
a matter as respects which the Administrator is required by any law to
exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions, the decision of the
Administrator thereon shall be final.

(6) The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered
by Ministers to the Administrator shall not be inquired into in any
court.

Other provisions as to Ministers.

45. Other provisions as to Ministers. (1) The Chief Minister
shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers shall be
appointed by the President on the advice of the Chief Ministers.

(2) The Ministers shall hold office during the pleasure of the
President.

(3) The Council of Ministers shall be collectively responsible to
the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory.

(4) Before a Minister enters upon his office, the Administrator
shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according
to the forms set out for the purpose in the First Schedule.

(5) A Minister who for any period of six consecutive months is
not a member of the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory shall
at the expiration of that period cease to be a Minister.

(6) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory may from time to time by
law determine, and until the Legislative Assembly so determines, shall
be determined by the Administrator with the approval of the President.

Conduct of business.

[PAGE 33]
46. Conduct of business. (1) The President shall make rules--

(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers; and

(b) for the more convenient transaction of business with the
Ministers including the procedure to be adopted in the
case of a difference of opinion between the
Administrator and the Council of Ministers or a
Minister.

(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive action
of the Administrator, whether taken on the advice of his Ministers or
otherwise, shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the
Administrator.

(3) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of
the Administrator, shall be authenticated in such manner as may be
specified in rules to be made by the Administrator, and the validity
of an order or instrument which is so authenticated shall not be
called in question on the ground that it is not an order or instrument
made or executed by the Administrator.

PART V

MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

Consolidated Fund of the Union territory.

47. Consolidated Fund of the Union territory. (1) As from such
Date 1* as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all revenues received in
2*[the Union territory] by the Government of India or the
Administrator of the Union territory in relation to any matter with
respect to which the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory has
power to make laws, and all grants made and all loans advanced to
the Union territory from the Consolidated Fund of India and all
moneys received by the Union territory in repayment of loans shall form
one Consolidated Fund to be entitled "the Consolidated Fund of the
Union territory".

(2) No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of 2*[the Union
territory] shall be appropriated except in accordance with, and for
the purposes and in the manner provided in, this Act.

(3) The custody of the Consolidated Fund of 2*[the Union
territory], the payment of moneys into such Fund, the withdrawal of
moneys therefrom and all other matters connected with or ancillary to
those matters shall be regulated by rules made by the Administrator
with the approval of the President.
[ 1* Substituted by Act 18 of 1987

[PAGE 34]
2* Substituted by Act 38 of 2001 w.e..f. 10.5.2006]

Public Account of the Union territory and moneys
credited to it

*47A.(1) As from such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all other
public moneys received by or on behalf of the Administrator shall be
credited to a Public Account entitled “the Public Account of the Union
territory”.

(2) The custody of public moneys, other than those credited
to the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory or the Contingency Fund
of the Union territory, received by or on behalf of the Administrator,
their payment into the Public Account of the Union territory and the
withdrawal of moneys from such account and all other matters connected
with or ancillary to the aforesaid matters shall be regulated by rules
made by the Administrator with the approval of the President.

* Inserted by Act 38 of 2001 w.e.f. 10.5.2006

Contingency Fund of the Union territory.

48. Contingency Fund of the Union territory. (1) There shall be
established a Contingency Fund in the nature of an imprest to be
entitled "the Contingency Fund of the Union territory" into which
shall be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund of the Union
territory such sums as may, from time to time, be determined by law
made by the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory; and the said
Fund shall be held by the Administrator to enable advances to be made
by him out of such Fund.

(2) No advances shall be made out of the Contingency Fund of the
Union territory except for the purposes of meeting unforeseen
expenditure pending authorisation of such expenditure by the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory under appropriations made
by law.

(3) The Administrator may make rules regulating all matters
connected with or ancillary to the custody of, the payment of moneys
into, and the withdrawal of moneys from, the Contingency Fund of the
Union territory.

Borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated
Fund of the Union territory

*48-A (1) The executive power of the Union extends to borrowing upon
the security of the Consolidated Fund of the Union territory within
such limits, if any, as may, from time to time, be fixed by Parliament
by law and to the giving of guarantees within such limits, if any, as
may be so fixed;

Provided that the power exercisable by the Government of India
under the sub-section shall also be exercisable by the Administrator

[PAGE 35]
subject to such conditions, if any, as the Government of India may
think fit to impose.

(2) Any sums required for the purpose of invoking a guarantee
shall be charged on the consolidated Fund of the Union territory.

* Inserted by Act 38 of 2001 w.e.f. 10.5.2006

Form of accounts of the Union territory

48B. The accounts of the Union territory shall be kept in such
form as the Administrator may, after obtaining advice of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India and with the approval of the
President prescribe by rules.

Audit reports.

49. Audit reports. The reports of the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India relating to the accounts of 2*[the Union territory]
for any period subsequent to the date referred to in sub-section (1)
of section 47 shall be submitted to the Administrator who shall cause
them to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory.

Relation of Administrator and his Ministers to
President.

50. Relation of Administrator and his Ministers to President.
Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Administrator and his
Council of Ministers shall be under the general control of, and comply
with such particular directions, if any, as may from time to time be
given by, the President.

Provision in case of failure of constitutional
machinery.

51. If the President, on receipt of a report from the
Administrator of 1*[the Union territory] or otherwise, is satisfied,--

(a) that a situation has arisen in which the administration
of the Union territory cannot be carried on in
accordance with the provisions of this Act, or

(b) that for the proper administration of the Union
territory it is necessary or expedient so to do,

the President may, by order, suspend the operation of all or any of

[PAGE 36]
the provisions of this Act for such period as he thinks fit and make
such incidental and consequential provisions as may appear to him to
be necessary or expedient for administering the Union territory in
accordance with the provisions of article 239.

* Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory"
(w.e.f. 30-5-1987).

Authorisation of expenditure by President.

2*[52. Authorisation of expenditure by President. Where the
Legislative Assembly of 1*[the Union territory] is dissolved, or its
functioning as such Assembly remains suspended, on account of an order
under section 51, it shall be competent for the President to authorise
when the House of the People is not in session expenditure from the
Consolidated Fund of that Union territory pending the sanction of such
expenditure by Parliament.]

*2. Ins. by Act 1 of 1980, s. 2 (w.e.f. 25-9-1979).

Provisions for election to Parliament from Goa, Daman
and Diu,and Pondicherry.

53. Provisions for election to Parliament from Goa, Daman and
Diu, and Pondicherry. (1) As soon as practicable after the
commencement of this Act, elections shall be held in accordance with
law--

(a) to fill the seats in the House of the People allotted to
the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu; and

(b) to fill the seat in the House of the People and the seat
in the Council of States allotted to the Union
territory of Pondicherry.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, the members nominated to represent the Union
territory of Goa, Daman and Diu in the House of the People shall
continue to be such until the election of the members to fill the two
seats in that House allotted to that Union territory:

Provided that where the dates of election of the members are
different, the members so nominated shall cease to be members of that
House on the earlier of those two dates.

Explanation.--In this sub-section, the expression "date of
election" has the same meaning as in section 67A of the Representation
of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951).
Transitional provisions for administration of justice in
certain areas in the Union territory of Mizoram.

[PAGE 37]
1*[54. Transitional provisions for administration of justice in
certain areas in the Union territory of Mizoram. On and from the
commencement of this Act in the Union territory of Mizoram and until
other provisions in this behalf are made by a competent Legislature or
other competent authority, the administration of justice in those
areas of that Union territory which are not comprised in any
autonomous district under the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution shall
be carried on, so far as may be, in accordance with the provisions of
paragraphs 4 and 5 of that Schedule, as if those areas were comprised
in an autonomous district under that Schedule and the provisions of
the said paragraphs were in force in those areas and for this
purpose,--

(i) all powers and functions of a District Council under the
provisions of the said paragraph 4 shall be exercised
and discharged by the Administrator or any officer
appointed by him in this behalf;

(ii) the said paragraph 5 shall have effect as if references
to the District Council, the Regional Council and the
courts constituted by the District Council, by whatever
form of words, had been omitted therefrom; and

(iii) references to Governor in the said paragraphs 4 and 5
shall be construed as references to the Administrator.]

* Subs. by Act 83 of 1971, s. 12, for s. 54 (w.e.f.
16-2-1972).

Provision as to provisional Legislative Assembly of
Arunachal Pradesh.

2*[54A. Provision as to provisional Legislative Assembly of
Arunachal Pradesh. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act
(including provisions relating to the strength of the Legislative
Assembly of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh), until the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh has
been duly constituted and summoned to meet for the first session under
and in accordance with the provisions of this Act, there shall be a
provisional Legislative Assembly which shall consist of members, being
those persons referred to in clauses (b), (c) and (d) of section 3 of
the North-East Frontier Agency (Administration) Supplementary
Regulation, 1971 (4 of 1971) and who are functioning, immediately
before the commencement of this Act in the Union territory of
Arunachal Pradesh, as members of the Pradesh Council constituted under
the said section 3.

* Ins. by Act 29 of 1975, s. 10.

(2) The term of office of the members of the provisional
Legislative Assembly shall expire immediately before the first meeting
of the Legislative Assembly duly constituted after the first general

[PAGE 38]
election to that Assembly.

(3) The provisional Legislative Assembly constituted under this
section shall, for so long as it is in existence, be deemed to be the
Legislative Assembly duly constituted under this Act and accordingly
the other provisions of this Act, so far as may be, apply in relation
to the provisional Legislative Assembly as they apply in relation to
the Legislative Assembly.]

Contracts and suits.

55. Contracts and suits. For the removal of doubts it is hereby
declared that--

(a) all contracts in connection with the administration of
1*[the Union territory] are contracts made in the
exercise of the executive power of the Union;

(b) all suits and proceedings in connection with the
administration of 1*[the Union territory] shall be
instituted by or against the Government of India.

Power of President to remove difficulties.

56. Power of President to remove difficulties. If any difficulty
arises in relation to the transition from the provisions of any of the
laws repealed by this Act or in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act and, in particular, in relation to the constitution of the
Legislative Assembly for 2*[the Union territory], the President may by
order do anything not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act
which appear to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of
removing the difficulty.

Amendment to certain-enactments.

57. Amendment to certain-enactments. (1) The enactments specified
in the Second Schedule--

(a) shall, together with all rules, notifications and orders
made or issued thereunder, extend to and come into
force in the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu,
and Pondicherry; and

(b) shall be subject to the amendments mentioned in the
fourth column of the said Schedule.

(2) All things done, and all steps taken, before the commencement
of this Act in connection with the preparation or revision of

[PAGE 39]
electoral rolls for the purpose of elections to the House of the
People from the Union territories of Goa, Daman and Diu, and
Pondicherry, and to the Legislative Assemblies of those Union
territories shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the
provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 950),
as amended by this Act, be deemed to have been done in accordance with
law.

1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory" (w.e.f.
30-5-1987).
2. Subs. by s. 65, ibid., for "any Union territory" (w.e.f.
30-5-1987).

Repeal and savings.

58. Repeal and savings. (1) The following laws are hereby
repealed:--

(a) the Territorial Councils Act, 1956 (103 of 1956);

(b) the Decree No. 46-2381, dated the 25th October, 1946, as
subsequently amended, relating to the Representative
Assembly of the State of Pondicherry;

(c) the Decree No. 47-1490, dated the 12th August, 1947, as
subsequently amended, relating to the setting up of a
Council of Government in the State of Pondicherry;

(d) the State of Pondicherry (Representation of the People)
Order, 1955, in so far as it relates to the
Representative Assembly of Pondicherry.

(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Territorial Councils Act,
1956 (103 of 1956),--

(a) every officer and other employee of the Territorial
Council of 1*[the Union territory] serving under the
Council immediately before such repeal shall become an
officer or other employee of Government and shall be
employed in connection with the administration of the
Union territory with such designation as the
Administrator may determine and shall hold office by
the same tenure and at the same remuneration and on the
same terms and conditions of service as he would have
but for such repeal held the same and shall continue to
do so unless and until such tenure, remuneration and
terms and conditions are duly altered by the
Administrator:

Provided that--

[PAGE 40]
(i) the tenure, remuneration and terms and
conditions of service of any such officer or other
employee shall not be altered to his disadvantage
without the previous sanction of the Central
Government;

(ii) any service rendered by any such officer
or other employee before such repeal shall be
deemed to be service rendered in connection with
the administration of the Union territory;

(iii) the Administrator may employ any such
officer or other employee in the discharge of such
functions as the Administrator may think proper
and every such officer or other employee shall
discharge those functions accordingly;
---------------------------------------------------------------------
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 1987, s. 65, for "a Union territory" (w.e.f.
30-5-1987).

(b) anything done or any action taken (including any
notification, order, scheme, rule, form, notice or byelaw made or issued, any licence or permission granted)
under the repealed Act shall in so far as it is not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue
in force unless and until it is superseded by anything
done or any action taken in accordance with law;

(c) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all
contracts entered into and all matters and things
engaged to be done by, with or for the Territorial
Council before such repeal shall be deemed to have been
incurred, entered into or engaged to be done in
exercise of the executive power of the Union for the
purposes of the administration of the Union territory;

(d) all assessments, valuations, measurements or divisions
made by the Territorial Council shall, in so far as
they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, continue in force unless and until they are
superseded by any assessment, valuation, measurement or
division made by the Administrator in accordance with
law;

(e) all properties, movable and immovable, and all interests
of whatsoever nature and kind, vested in the
Territorial Council immediately before such repeal
shall, with all rights of whatsoever description, used,
enjoyed or possessed by that Council, vest in the Union
for the purposes of the administration of the Union
territory;

(f) all rates, taxes, cesses, fees, rents, fares and other
charges which immediately before such repeal were being
lawfully levied by the Territorial Council shall
continue to be levied at the same rate at which they

[PAGE 41]
were being levied by the Council immediately before
such repeal until provision to the contrary is made by
law;

(g) all rates, taxes, cesses, fees, rents, fares and other
charges due to the Territorial Council immediately
before such repeal shall be deemed to be due to the
Union in connection with the administration of the
Union territory;

(h) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings
instituted or which might have been instituted by or
against the Territorial Council may be continued or
instituted by or against the Government of India.

THE FIRST SCHEDULE

[See sections 4 (a), 11 and 45 (4)]

FORMS OF OATHS OR AFFIRMATIONS

I

Form of Oath or Affirmation to be made by a Candidate for Election
to the Legislative Assembly

"I, A.B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill a seat in
the Legislative Assembly of do swear in the name of God/solemnly
affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution
of India as by law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty
and integrity of India."

II

Form of Oath or Affirmation to be made by a Member of
the Legislative Assembly of a Union territory

"I, A.B., having been elected (or nominated) a member of the
Legislative Assembly of do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm
that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and
integrity of India and that I will faithfully discharge the duty upon
which I am about to enter."

III

Form of Oath of Office for a Member of the Council of Ministers
of a Union territory

"I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law
established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of
India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties

[PAGE 42]
as a Minister for the Union territory of---------, and that I will do
right to all manner of people in accordance with the Constitution and
the law without fear or favour, affection or ill-will."

IV

Form of Oath of Secrecy for a Member of the Council of Ministers
of a Union territory

"I, A.B., do swear in the name of God/solemnly affirm that I will
not directly or indirectly communicate or reveal to any person or
persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or
shall become known to me as a Minister for the Union territory of
--------, except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties
as such Minister."

THE SECOND SCHEDULE

(See section 57)

ENACTMENTS AMENDED

[Not printed.]