[PAGE 1]
THE CENSUS ACT, 1948
(Act No. 37 of 1948)
As amended in 1994
[3rd September, 1948]

An act to provide for certain matters in connection
with the taking of Census

WHEREAS it is expedient to provide for the taking of census in 1***
India or any part thereof whenever necessary or desirable and to provide for certain
matters in connection with the taking of such census;
It is hereby enacted as follows: -
Shorttitle 1. (1) This Act may be called the Census Act, 1948.andextent.

2[(2) It extends to the whole of India. 3* * * ]

Definitions. 5[2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-

(a) “premises” means any land, building or part of a
building and includes a hut, shed or other structure
or any part thereof;

(b) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;

(c) “vehicle” means any vehicle used or capable of being
used for the purpose of road transport, whether
propelled by mechanical power or otherwise.

Ruleof 2. Any reference in this Act to the Indian Penal Code or the 45 ofconstruction
respecting Indian Evidence Act, 1872 or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1860
enactments
not 1973 shall, in relation to the State of Jammu and Kashmir, be 1 of
extending to construed as a reference to the corresponding enactment in 1872Jammuand
Kashmir. force in that State.] 2 of 1974

!

! 1. The Act has been extended to:-
Goa, Daman and Diu by Reg. 11 of 1963, S.3 and Sch. with modifications to the whole of the Union Territory of
Lakshadweep vide Reg.8 of 1965, S.3 and Sch.(w.e.f. 1-10-1987).
The State of Sikkim vide Notification No. 3465 dated 21-9-1976 (w.e.f. 13-9-1976).
2. The words “the Provinces and Acceding States of” rep. by A.O. 1950.
3. Subs. ibid.for the former sub-section.
4. The words “except the State of Jammu and Kashmir” omitted by Act 22 of 1959, S.2.
5. Subs. by Act 11 of 1994, S.2, for S.2.

[PAGE 2]
Central 3. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section(2), afterGovernment
totake the word “census-officers”, the words ‘with such designations as
Census.
that Government may deem necessary” shall be inserted.

Staff of every 4. After section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shalllocal authoritytobemade be inserted, namely:available for
taking
census. “4A. Every local authority in a State shall, when so directed
by a written order by the Central Government or by an authority
appointed by that Government in this behalf, make available to
any Director of Census Operations such staff as may be
necessary for the performance of any duties in connection with
the taking of census”.
!

Requisitioning premises, 5. After section 7 of the principal Act, the following sections shall
of vehicles, be inserted, namely:etc. for
taking of a
census.! “[7A. (1) If it appears to the Central Government that, in
connection with taking of a census, -

(a) any premises are needed or are likely to be
needed, or

(b) any vehicle, vessel or animal is needed or is likely
to be needed,

that Government may by order in writing requisition such
premises, or vehicle, vessel or animal, as the case may be, and
make such further orders as may appear to it to be necessary or
expedient in connection with the requisitioning.

(2) The requisition shall be effected by an order in
writing addressed to the person deemed by the Central
Government to be the owner or person in possession of the
property, and such order shall be served in the prescribed
manner on the person to whom it is addressed.

(3) Whenever any property is requisitioned under sub-

!
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, S.3 and Sch.II for “Superindent of Census Operation” (w.e.f. 20-12-1974)
2. Ins. by Act 11 of 1994, S.3.
3. Ins. by S.4 ibid.
4. Subs. by Act 56 of 1974, S.3 and Sch II “Superintendent of Census Operations” (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).
! 1. Ins. by Act 11 of 1994, S.5

[PAGE 3]
section (1), the period of such requisition shall not extend
beyond the period for which such property is required for any of
the purposes mentioned in that sub-section.

Payment of 7B. (1) Whenever in pursuance of section 7A the Centralcompensation. Government requisitions any premises, there shall be paid to the
persons interested compensation the amount of which shall be
determined by taking into consideration the following, namely: -

(i) the rent payable in respect of the premises or if no!
rent is so payable, the rent payable for similar
premises in the locality;

(ii) if in consequence of the requisition of the premises
the person interested is compelled to change his
residence or place of business, the reasonable
expenses (if any) incidental to such change:

Provided that where any person interested being aggrieved
by the amount of compensation so determined makes an
application within the prescribed time to the Central Government
for referring the matter to an arbitrator, the amount of
compensation to be paid shall be such as the arbitrator
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government may
determine:

Provided further that where there is any dispute as to the
title to receive the compensation or as to the apportionment of
the amount of compensation, it shall be referred by the Central
Government to an arbitrator appointed in this behalf by that
Government for determination, and shall be determined in
accordance with the decision of such arbitrator.

Explanation – In this sub-section, the expression “person
interested” means the person who was in actual possession of
the premises requisitioned under section 7A immediately before
the requisition, or where no person was in such actual
possession, the owner of such premises.

(2) Whenever in pursuance of section 7A the Central
Government requisitions any vehicle, vessel or animal, there
shall be paid to the owner thereof compensation the amount of
which shall be determined by the Central Government on the
basis of the fares or rates prevailing in the locality for the hire of

[PAGE 4]
such vehicle, vessel or animal:

Provided that where the owner of such vehicle, vessel or
animal being aggrieved by the amount of compensation so
determined makes an application within the prescribed time to
the Central Government for referring the matter to an arbitrator,
the amount of compensation to be paid shall be such as the
arbitrator appointed in this behalf by the Central Government
may determine:

Provided further that where immediately before the
requisitioning the vehicle or vessel was by virtue of a hirepurchase agreement in the possession of a person other than
the owner, the amount determined under this sub-section as the
total compensation payable in respect of the requisition shall be
apportioned between that person and the owner in such manner
as they may agree upon, and in default of agreement, in such
manner as an arbitrator appointed by the Central Government in
this behalf may decide.

Power to 7C. The Central Government may, with a view toobtain
information. requisitioning any property under section 7A or determining the
compensation payable under section 7B, by order, require any
person to furnish to such authority as may be specified in the
order such information in his possession relating to such
property as may be so specified.

Power of 7D. Any person authorised in this behalf by the Centralentry into
and Government may enter into any premises and inspect such
inspection of
premises, premises and any vehicle, vessel or animal therein for the
etc.. purpose of determining whether, and if so in what manner, an
order under section 7A should be made in relation to such
premises, vehicle, vessel or animal, or with a view to securing
compliance with any order made under that section.

Eviction from 7E. (1) Any person remaining in possession of any requisitionedrequisitioned
premises. premises in contravention of any order made under section 7A
may be summarily evicted from the premises by any officer
empowered by the Central Government in this behalf.

(2) Any officer so empowered may, after giving to any
woman not appearing in public reasonable warning and facility
to withdraw, remove or open any lock or bolt or break open any
door of any building or do any other act necessary for effecting
such eviction.

[PAGE 5]
Release of 7F. (1) When any premises requisitioned under section 7A arepremises
from to be released from requisition, the possession thereof shall be
requisition.
delivered to the person from whom possession was taken at the
time when the premises were requisitioned, or if there were no
such person, to the person deemed by the Central Government
to be the owner of such premises, and such delivery of
possession shall be a full discharge of the Central Government
from all liabilities in respect of such delivery, but shall not
prejudice any rights in respect of the premises which any other
person may be entitled by due process of law to enforce against
the person to whom possession of the premises is so delivered.

(2) Where the person to whom possession of any premises
requisitioned under section 7A is to be given under sub-section
(1) cannot be found or is not readily ascertainable or has no
agent or any other person empowered to accept delivery on his
behalf, the Central Government shall cause a notice declaring
that such premises are released from requisition to be affixed on
some conspicuous part of such premises and publish the notice
in the Official Gazette.

(3) When a notice referred to in sub-section (2) is published
in the Official Gazette, the premises specified in such notice shall
cease to be subject to requisition on and from the date of such
publication and be deemed to have been delivered to the person
entitled to possession thereof, and the Central Government shall
not be liable for any compensation or other claim in respect of
such premises for any period after the said date.

Delegation of
functions of 7G. The Central Government may, by notification in the
the Central Official Gazette, direct that any powers conferred or any duty
Government
with regard imposed on that Government by any of the provisions of
to
requisition- sections 7A to 7F shall, under such conditions, if any, as may be
ing. specified in the direction, be exercised or discharged by such
officer as may be specified.

Penalty for 7H. If any person contravenes any order made under sectioncontravention of any 7A or section 7C, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
order
regarding term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.]
requisitioning.

6. In section 8 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the
words “State Government”, the words “Central Government”
shall be substituted.

[PAGE 6]
7. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the
words “State Government”, at both the places where they occur,
the words “Census Commissioner” shall be substituted.

Penalties. In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1)
(i) for part (a), the following parts shall be substituted,
namely:-

“(a) Any census-officer or any person lawfully required to give
assistance towards the taking of census who refuses to perform
any duty imposed upon him by this Act or any rule made
thereunder, or any person who hinders or obstructs another
person in performing any such duty, or

(aa) any census-officer or any person lawfully required to
give assistance towards the taking of a census who neglects to
use reasonable diligence in performing any duty imposed upon
him or in obeying any order issued to him in accordance with
this Act or any rule made thereunder, or any person who hinders
or obstructs another person in performing any such duty or
obeying any such order, or”;
(ii) after part (c), the following part shall be inserted, namely:-

“(ca) any local authority which fails to comply with an order
made under section 4A, or”;
!

(iii) for the brackets, letters and words “ (b) or (c) shall also be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months”,
the brackets, letters an words “(a), (b) or (c) shall also be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years”
shall be substituted.

9. For section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall
be substituted, namely:-

Sanction “12. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 197 of the
required for
prosecutions. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, no prosecution under this Act 2 of 1974
shall be instituted except with the previous sanction, -

!
1. Sub. by Act 11 of 1994, S.8

! 2. Subs. by S.9, ibid.

[PAGE 7]
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or was at the
time of commission of the alleged offence employed –

(i) in a company, as defined in section 3 of the
Companies Act, 1956, in which not less than fifty-one
percent of the paid-up capital is held by the Central 1 of 1956
Government or any company which is a subsidiary thereof
within the meaning of that Act, or

(ii) by a corporation or a local authority established by
or under a Central Act which is owned or controlled by the
Central Government,

of the Central Government or of an authority authorised in this
behalf by that Government; and

(b) in the case of a person other than referred to in
! clause (a) of the State Government.

10. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:-

Certain
offences to “13A.(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
becognizable Criminal Procedure, 1973, no police officer or court shall take 2 of 1974
and triable
summarily. cognizance of any offence under part (a), (b) or (c) of subsection (1) of section 11, except upon information received from
or on a complaint made by, as the case may be, the Director of
Census Operations or any officer authorised by him in this
behalf.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, every offence punishable under part 2 of 1974
(a), (b) or (c) of sub-section (1) of section 11 may be tried
summarily.]

!
Protection of 2[15A. No member of the census staff shall suffer any disabilityservice
interests of in service by reason of his being on census duty and the period
members of
censusstaff. spent by him on such census duty shall be deemed to be the
duty under his lending employer and any duty performed under
this Act shall not in any manner affect the right of promotion or
other advancement in his original service.

1. ! Ins. by Act 11 of 1994, S. 10

[PAGE 8]
Protection of 15B. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lieaction taken
ingoodfaith. against the Census Commissioner or any Director of Census
Operations or any census-officer or any member of the census
staff for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be
done under this Act or the rules made thereunder.]

Temporary
suspensionof 16. Notwithstanding anything in any enactment or rule with
other laws as respect to the mode in which a census is to be taken in any
to mode of
takingcensus municipality, the municipal authority, in consultation with the
in municipali- 3[Director of Census Operations] or with such other authority asties.
the State Government may authorise in this behalf, shall, at the
time appointed for the taking of any census cause the census of
the municipality to be taken wholly or in part by any method
authorised by or under this Act.

!

Grant of 17. 1[Subject to the provisions of section 15, the Censusstatistical
abstracts. Commissioner or any Director of Census Operations] may, if he
so thinks fit, at the request and cost to be determined by him of
any local authority or person, cause abstracts to be prepared
and supplied containing any such statistical information as can
be derived from the census returns for 2[India or any State] as
the case may be, being information which is not contained in
any published report and which in his opinion it is reasonable for
that authority or person to require.

Power to 3[17A. The Central Government may, by notification in theextend the
provisions of Official Gazette, extend the provisions of this Act, with such
Act to other
operations. restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, to pre-tests, pilot
studies, census of houses which precede the population count
and post enumeration check and evaluation studies or statistical
surveys or any other operation as may be deemed necessary for
the purpose of census.]

Power to 18. (1) The Central Government may make rules bymakerules.
notification in the Official Gazette for carrying out the purposes
of this Act.

1. Subs. by Act 11 of 1994, S.11
2. Ins. by S.12, ibid.
3. Ins. by Act 56 of 1974 S.3 and Sch II “Superintendent of Census Operations” (w.e.f. 20-12-1974).
! 1. Act 11 of 1994, S.13

[PAGE 9]
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government may
make rules providing for the appointment of census-officers and
of persons to perform any of the duties of census-officers or to
give assistance towards the taking of a census, and for the
general instructions to be issued to such officers and persons
4[and providing for the manner of service of orders regarding
requisitioning of premises, or vehicle; vessel or animal and the
time within which the application may be made to it by any
interested person aggrieved by the amount of compensation
determined under section 7 B for referring the matter to an
arbitrator.]

!
(3) 5[Every rule made under this Section shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 30 days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rules shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.]

23.6.00

2. Subs. by the AO 1950, for “the Provinces of India or the Province”.
3. Ins. by Act 11 of 1994, S.14
4. Added by S.15, ibid.
5. Ins. by Act 4 of 1986, S.2 & Sch. (w.e.f. 15-3-1986).