[PAGE 1]
PUBLIC APPOINTMENTS
HIGH COURT OF DELHI : NEW DELHI
(website:www.delhihighcourt.nic.in)

DELHI HIGHER JUDICIAL SERVICE EXAMINATION – 2026
(As Per The Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1970 As Amended Up To Date)

HIGH COURT OF DELHI invites online applications from eligible candidates for
filling up 27 vacancies (24 existing and 03 anticipated) by way of direct recruitment in
Delhi Higher Judicial Service by holding Delhi Higher Judicial Service Examination in
three successive stages:-

(i) Delhi Higher Judicial Service Preliminary Examination (Objective type
with 25% negative marking) for selection of candidates for the Mains
Examination (Written); and

(ii) Delhi Higher Judicial Service Mains Examination (Written) for selection of
candidates for calling for viva-voce.

(iii) Viva-voce.

The qualifications for direct recruits shall be as follows:-

(1) must be a citizen of India.

(2) In case of an Advocate, must have been continuously practising for not less
than seven years as on the last date of receipt of applications, i.e.,
15.07.2026.

(3) In case of Judicial Officers

(i) must have already completed seven years in Bar before he/she was
recruited in the subordinate judicial service, or;

(ii) must have seven years combined experience as a Judicial Officer
and an Advocate as on the last date of receipt of the applications,
i.e., 15.07.2026.

(4) In case of a person who has been or who is in judicial service, must have a
combined experience of seven years or more as an advocate or a Judicial
Officer as on the last date of receipt of the application.

(5) Must have attained the age of 35 years and have not attained the age of 45
years on the last date of receipt of application.

The scale of pay of the members of Delhi Higher Judicial Service is (J-5)
Rs.144840-194660.

The Delhi Higher Judicial Service Preliminary Examination (Objective type)
referred to above, will be held on Sunday, the 26th July, 2026 (11.00 AM to 01.00 PM).

[PAGE 2]
The candidates shall submit their applications ONLINE ONLY in the prescribed
format through the official website of High Court of Delhi i.e.
www.delhihighcourt.nic.in as per schedule of dates given hereinafter:

Date and Time of commencement for creation of new Log In and 01.07.2026
filling Online Application Form at 1000 hours

Last Date and Time for filling Online Application Form and/or 15.07.2026
making payment through Debit Card/Credit Card/Internet at 1730 hours
Banking/UPI

The fees (non-refundable) in the sum of Rs.2,000/- for General Category
candidates and Rs.500/- for reserved category candidates [Scheduled Caste / Scheduled
Tribe / Persons with Disabilities (identified disabilities) of 40% or more] should be
paid through Debit Card/ Credit Card/ Internet Banking/UPI.

The candidates can take printout of application form and keep it for future
reference. They should not send the printout of the online application form to the
High Court of Delhi.

The category wise break up of vacancies to be filled is as under:-

Category Break up of Vacancies Total No. of
Existing Anticipated vacancies
(till30.06.2027)
General 14 03 17
SC 05# -- 05
ST 05# -- 05
TOTAL 24 03 27
# 03 out of 05 vacancies reserved for SC Category and 04 out of 05 vacancies reserved
for ST category are backlog vacancies.

Note 1: The number of vacancies is subject to change including but not limited to the
implementation of judgment dated 11.03.2026 passed in RP(C) No.621/2021 in CA
No.1698/2020 titled Dheeraj Mor v. High Court of Delhi.
Note 2: Out of the 27 vacancies to be advertised, the reservation for Identified PwD Categories
Candidates with Benchmark Disability (40% or more) shall be as under:-

No. of Vacancies Reserved for PwD Category candidates
PwD (Blindness and Low Vision) 01*
PwD (one arm, one leg, both legs, leprosy cured, dwarfism and acid attack victim) 01
PwD (Specific Learning Disability) and PwD (Multiple Disabilities involving 01*
Blindness and low vision; one arm, one leg, both legs, leprosy cured, dwarfism and
acid attack victim; and specific learning disability)
Total 03
* Reservation will be carried forward on 02 out of 03 vacancies reserved for PwD category
candidates being backlog reserved vacancies

Note 2(i): In view of Gazette notification dated 04.01.2021, the disabilities for which the
post of Judicial Officer has been identified as suitable are as under:-

[PAGE 3]
(a) Blindness and low vision;
(b) One arm, one leg, both legs, leprosy cured, dwarfism and acid attack victim;
(c) Specific learning disability;
(d) Multiple disabilities involving aforesaid disabilities.

Note 2(ii) 01 carry forward reservation against vacancy for PwD category (Specific
learning disability AND Multiple disabilities involving Blindness and low vision;
one arm, one leg, both legs, leprosy cured, dwarfism & acid attack victim; and
specific learning disability) advertised in DHJS Exam-2022, DHJS Exam-2023
and DHJS Exam-2024 can now be filled by either the same categories[(c) & (d)]
and in the event of non-availability of such candidate, by interchange among the
following categories:

(a) Blindness and low vision.
(b) One arm, one leg, both legs, leprosy cured, dwarfism and acid attack
victim.

Note 2(iii) 01 carry forward reservation against vacancy for PwD category (Blindness and
low vision) advertised in DHJS Exam-2022, DHJS Exam-2023 & DHJS Exam-
2024 can now be filled by either the same category and in the event of nonavailability of such candidate by interchange among the following categories:

(b) One arm, one leg, both legs, leprosy cured, dwarfism, and acid attack
victim;
(c) Specific learning disability; & (d) Multiple disabilities involving aforesaid
disabilities mentioned in (a) to (c).

The candidates applying for the examination must ensure that they fulfill all the
eligibility conditions for admission to the examination. Their admission at all the stages
of examination for which they are admitted by this Court viz. Preliminary Examination
(Objective type), Mains Examination (Written) and Viva-Voce shall be purely
provisional, subject to their satisfying the prescribed eligibility conditions. The question
of eligibility would be thoroughly examined at the subsequent stages. If on verification at
any time before or after the Preliminary Examination (Objective Type), Mains
Examination (Written) and Viva-Voce, it is found that they do not fulfill any of the
eligibility conditions, their candidature for the examination shall stand cancelled without
any notice or further reference.

Details regarding Preliminary Examination (Objective type), Mains Examination
(Written), Viva-Voce, eligibility, relaxation in marks and other general terms and
conditions applicable to the candidates are given in the Instructions available on the
online portal, link for which would be available on the website of High Court of Delhi
i.e.www.delhihighcourt.nic.in. Candidates are advised to go through the Instructions as
well as Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1970 (as amended up to date) before filling
up the application form.
Sd/-
(Arun Bhardwaj)
Registrar General
01.07.2026