[PAGE 1]
‘Pare we Se Ter—(T7)04/0007/2003—16 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—16
pt
IRA = USA
AAI
EXTRAORDINARY
wt WI— ware 1
PART II — Section 1
wiftrare & wert
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY .
¥ 40] we farcit, Aetare, AE 31, 2016/FFs 10, 1938 (WF)

No. 40] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, MAY 31, 2016/JYAISTHA 10, 1938 (SAKA)
wa ar 4 Rt Gs Gen at ont t fred fe ae He MHerd S ST A TaN Tae |
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)

New Delhi, the 31st May, 2016/Jyaistha 10, 1938 (Saka)

THE ENEMY PROPERTY (AMENDMENT AND

VALIDATION) THIRD ORDINANCE, 2016
No. 6 oF 2016

Promulgated by the President in the Sixty-seventh
Year of the Republic of India.

An Ordinance further to amend the Enemy Property
Act, 1968 and the Public Premises (lviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.

WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Ordinance, 2016 was promulgated by the
President on the 7” day of January, 2016;

AND WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and ,
Validation) Bill, 2016 to replace the Lnemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016 has been
passed by the House of the People and is pending in the
Council of States;

[PAGE 2]
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY [Part II— :
AND WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Bill, 2016 has been referred to the Select
, Committee of the Rajya Sabha for its examination and ;
report;
AND WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Second Ordinance was promulgated by the
President on the 2nd April, 2016;
AND WHEREAS the Select Committee submitted its
: Report, along with the Enemy Property (Amendment and ;
Validation) Bill, 2016 incorporating therein the
amendments decided by the Committee on the 6" May,
2016;
AND WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Bill, 2016, as reported by the Select
Committee, could not be taken up for consideration and
passing in the Council of States; ;
AND WHEREAS the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) Second Ordinance, 2016 will cease to operate
on the 5" day of June, 2016;
; AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give . .
continued effect to the provisions of the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Second Ordinance, 2016 ;
’ along with the amendments as decided by the Select ~
Committee; : ,
AND WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the
; President is satisfied that circumstances exist which render
it necessary for him to take immediate action; .
Now, THEREFORE, in excrcise of the powers conferred
by clause (1) of article 123 of the Constitution, the
President is pleased to promulgate the following
Ordinance:-- .
Short ttle and 1. (1) ‘This Ordinance may be called the Enemy
commencement. Property (Amendment and Validation) Third Ordinance,
2016.
(2) Save as otherwise provided, it shall be deemed to
have come into force on the 7" day of January, 2016.

[PAGE 3]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY 3
Amendment of 2. On and from the date of commencement of the
section 2. Enemy Property Act, 1968 (hereinafter rcferred to as the 34 of 1968. ;
principal Act), in section 2, .
(i) in clause (5),
(J) for the words “an enemy subject”, the words
“an enemy subject including his legal heir and
successor whether or not a citizen of India or the
citizen of a country which is not an enemy or the
enemy, enemy subject or his legal heir and successor
who has changed his nationality” shall be substituted
and shall always be deemed to have been substituted;
(i) for the words “an enemy firm”, the words
“an enemy firm, including its succeeding firm
whether or not partners or members of such
succeeding firm are citizens of India or citizens of .a
country which is not an enemy or such firm which ;
; has changed its nationality” shall be substituted and
. shall always be deemed to have becn substituted; .
(TD for the words “docs not include a citizen of
India”, the words ‘ “does not include a citizen of
, India other than those citizens of India, being the
legal heir and successor of the “enemy” or “enemy ,
subject” or “enemy firm” ’ shall be substituted and
shall always be deemed to have been substituted;
_ (UV) the following Explanations shall be inserted
and shall always be deemed to have been inserted at
the end, namely:--
‘Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this clause,
the expression “does not include a citizen of India”
shall exclude and shall always be deemed to have °
been excluded those citizens of India, who are or
have been the Iegal heir and successor of an
, “enemy” or an “enemy subject” or an “enemy firm”
which or who has ceased to be an enemy due to
death, extinction, winding up of business or change of :
nationality or that the legal heir and successor is a :
citizen of India or the citizen of a country which is
not an enemy.

[PAGE 4]
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
onnNj‘“leyotywqwoO0nwm™#$NxwTwTWWMNNNMNNmmmmeEeeryreeoOoOeeeeeeoeeeeeemDdre®:S
Explanation 2.----or the purposes of this clause,
it is hereby clarificd that nothing contained in this
Act shall affect any right of the legal heir and
successor referred to in this clause (not being
inconsistent to the provisions of this Act) which have
been conferred upon him under any other law for the
time being in force.’;
(id) in clause (c), in the proviso,
(J) after the words “dies in the territories:to which
this Act extends”, the words “or dics in any territory
outside India” shall be inserted and shall always be
deemed to have been inserted;
(1) the following Explanations shall be inserted
and shall always be deemed to have been inserted at
the end, namely:

: ‘Explanation |. For the purposes of this clause, ;
it is hereby clarified that “enemy property” shall, :
notwithstanding that the enemy or the enemy subject
or the enemy firm has ceased to be an enemy due to
death, extinction, winding up of business or change
of nationality or that the Icgal heir and successor is a
citizen of India or the citizen ofa country which is
not an encmy, continue and always be deemed to be :
continued as an enemy property.

Explanation 2.-~For the purposes of this clause,
the expression “enemy property” shall mean and
include and shall be deemed to have always meant
and included all rights, titles and interest in, or any
benefit arising out of, such property.’.

Amendment of 3. On and from the date of commencement of the .

section 5. principal Act, in section 5, after sub-section (2), the
following shall be inserted, and shall always be deemed
to have been inserted, namely:-- -

“(3) The cnemy property vested in the Custodian
shall, notwithstanding that the encmy or the enemy
subject or the enemy firm has ccased to be an enemy
duc to death, extinction, winding up of business or
change of nationality or that the legal heir and
successor is a citizen of India or the citizen of a
country which is not an enemy, continuc to remain,
save as otherwise provided in this Act, vested in the

[PAGE 5]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
eee eee
Custodian. .
Explanation. -For the purposes of this subsection, “enemy property vested in the Custodian”
shall include and shall always be deemed to have
been included all rights, titles, and interest in, or any
benefit arising out of, such property vested in him
under this Act.’.
Insertion. of new 4. After section 5 of the principal Act, the following
section 5A. section shall be inserted, namely:-—--
Issue of “SA. The Custodian may, after making such .
certificate by inquiry as he deems necessary, by order, declare that
, the property of the enemy or the enemy subject or the
; enemy firm described in the order, vests in him under
this Act and issue a certificate to this effect and such
certificate shall be the evidence of the facts stated
therein.”. ,
Insertion of ‘5. On and from the date of commencement of the
sh, section principal Act, after section SA (as inserted by section 4
. of Enemy Property (Amendment and _ Validation) :
Ordinance, 2016, the following shall be inserted and
shall always be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
‘5B. Nothing contained in any law for the time Law of
being in force relating to succession or any custom or SUCCcession or .
usage governing succession of property shall apply in 9Y “en or
relation to the enemy property under this Act and no apply to enemy
person (including his legal heir and successor) shall property.
have any right and shall be deemcd not to have any :
right (including all rights, titles and interests or any
benefit arising out of such property) in relation to
such enemy property.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this scction,
the expressions "custom" and "usage" signify any rule ;
- which, having been continuously and uniformly
observed for a long time, has obtained the force of
law in the matters of succession of property.’.
6. On and from the date of commencement of the Amendment of
principal Act, for section 6 of the principal Act, the Section 6.
following section shall be substituted and shall always be
deemcd to have been substituted, namcly:

[PAGE 6]
ca
“6. (1) No enemy or enemy subject or enemy firm Prohibition to
shall have any right and shall never be deemed to ‘ansfer any
have any right to transfer any property vested in the aad ested
Custodian under this Act, whether before or after the a cnemy, y
commencement of this Act and any transfer of such enemy subject
property shall be void and shall always be deemed to or enemy firm.
have been void.
(2) Where any property vested in the Custodian
under this Act had been. transferred, before the
: commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment
and Validation) Third Ordinance, 2016, by an enemy
or enemy subject or enemy firm and such transfer
has been declared, by an order, made by the Central
. Government, to be void, and the property had heen
vested or deemed to have been vested in the
Custodian [by virtue of the said order made under
section 6, as it stood before its substitution by section
6 -of the Enemy Property (Amendment and
Validation) ‘Third Ordinance, 2016] such property
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or .
other authority, continue to vest or be deemed to have
been vested in the Custodian and no person
(including an enemy or enemy subject or enemy .
firm) shall have any right or deemed to have any
right (including all rights, titles and. interests or any
_ benefit arising out of such property) over the said
property vested or deemed to have been vested in
the Custodian.”.
Amendment 7. In section 8 of the principal Act,
of section 8. :
(i) On and from the date of commencement of the
principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following subsection shall be substituted and shall always be
deemed to have been substituted, namely:
“(7) With respect to the property vested in the
Custodian under this Act, the Custodian may take
or authorise the taking of such measures as he
considers necessary or expedient for preserving
such property till it is disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of this Act.”; ,

[PAGE 7]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY 7
ee eee
(ii) in sub-section (2),---
(a) after clause (7), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely:—- ;

“(ia) fix and collect the rent, standard

rent, lease rent, licence fee or usage charges,
: as the case may be, in respect of enemy
property;
(5) after clause (iv), the following clause shall
be inserted, namely: .

“(iva) secure vacant possession of the
enemy property by evicting the unauthorised
or illegal occupant or trespasser and remove
unauthorised or illegal constructions, if any;”. .

Insertion of 8. After section 8 of the principal Act, the following

an section section shall be inserted, namely:-~
Sale of “8A.(/) Notwithstanding anything contained in
property by any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal
. or other authority or any law for the time being in
force, the Custodian may, within such time as may
; be specified by the Central Government in this
behalf, dispose of whether by sale or otherwise, as
the case may bc, with prior approval of the Central
. Government, by general or special order, enemy
properties vested in him immediately before the date
of commencement of the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Third Ordinance, 2016
in accordance with the provisions of this Act, as
amended by the Enemy Property (Amendment and

Validation) Third Ordinance, 2016.

(2) The Custodian may, for the purpose of
disposal of enemy property under sub-section (J),
make requisition of the services of any police officer
to assist him and it shall be the duty of such officer to
comply with such requisition.

(3) The Custodian shall, on disposal of enemy.
property under sub-section (/) immediately deposit
the sale proceeds into the Consolidated Fund of India
and intimate details thereof to the Central
Government.

[PAGE 8]
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY [Parr II—

(4) The Custodian shall send a report to the

Central Government at such intervals, as it may
specify, for the enemy properties disposed of under
sub-section (/), containing such details, (including
the price for which such property has been sold and

the particulars of the buyer to whom the properties
have been sold or disposed of and the details of the ,
proceeds of sale or disposal deposited into the
Consolidated Fund of India) as it may specify.

(5) The Central Government may, by general or
special order, issue such directions to the Custodian
on the matters relating to disposal of enemy property
under sub-section (/) and such directions shall be
binding upon the Custodian and the buyer of the
enemy propertics referred to in that sub-section and ;
other persons connected to such sale or disposal.

(6) The Central Government may, by general or
special order, make such guidelines for disposal of
cnemy property under sub-scction (/).

(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
section, the Central Government may direct that
disposal of enemy property under sub-section (/)
shall be made by any other authority or Ministry or
Department instcad of Custodian and in that case all
the provisions of this section shall apply to such
authority or Ministry or Department in respect of
disposal of enemy property under sub-section (/).

(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in subsections (/) to (7), the Central Government may deal
with or utilise the enemy property in such manner as
it may deem fit.”.

Insertion of 9. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following

IOA Section section shall be inserted, namely:

Power to issue “10A.(1) Where the Custodian proposes to sell

certificate of any enemy immovable property vested in him, to any

a person, he may on receipt of the sale proceeds of
such property, issue a certificate of sale in favour of
such person and such certificate of sale shall,
notwithstanding the fact that the original title deeds
of the property have not been handed over to the

[PAGE 9]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 :
ee
transferee, be valid and conclusive proof of
ownership of such property by such person.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in’ any
law for the time being in force, the certificate of sale,
referred to in sub-section (/), issued by the Custodian
shall be a valid instrument for the registration of the
property in favour of the transferee and the
registration in respect of enemy property for which
such certificate of sale had been issued by the
Custodian, shall not be refused on the ground of lack
of original title deeds in respect of such property or
‘for any such other reason.”.
Amendment of 10. In section 11 of the principal Act, after subsection II. section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely: ;
“(3) ‘The Custodian, Deputy Custodian or
Assistant Custodian shall have, for the purposes of
exercising powers or discharging his functions under
this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil
5 of 1908. court under the Code of Civil Procedurc,1908, while
dealing with any case under this Act, in respect of the
following matters, namely:--
(a) requiring the discovery and inspection of
documents;
7 (b) enforcing the attendance of any person,
including any officer dealing with land, revenue
and registration matters, banking officer or officer
of a company and examining him on oath;
(c) compelling the production of books, .
documents and other records; and
(a) issuing commissions for the examination
of witnesses or documents.”.
: 11. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-scction Amendment of
(1), for the words “two per centum”, at both the places section 17.
where they occur, the words "five per centum" shall be
substituted.

[PAGE 10]
- 10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
12. For section 18 of the principal Act, the following Substitution of
section shall be substituted, namely: - new section for
section 18.
“18. The Central Government may, on receipt of a Transfer of
representation from a person, aggrieved by an order Property vested
vesting a property as cnemy property in the Custodian ropert in
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt . Ooo Ee nag,
of such order or from the date of its publication in the’
Official Gazette, whichever is earlier and after giving
a reasonable opportunity of being heard, if it is of the
opinion that any enemy property vested in the
Custodian under this Act and remaining with him was
not an enemy property, it may by general or special
order, direct the Custodian that such property vested
as enemy property in the Custodian may be
transferred to the person from whom such property
was acquired and vested in the Custodian.”.
, 13. On and from the date of commencement of the _ Insertion of new
principal Act, after section 18 |as substituted by section S°ton!84-
: 12 of Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) |
Ord. 1 of : : : :
2016. Ordinance, 2016], the following section shall be inserted
and shal] always be deemed to have been inserted,
namely:
Income not “18A. Any income received in respect of the
liable to be enemy property by the Custodian shall not,
returned. notwithstanding that such property chad been
transferred by way of sale under scction 8A or section
18, as the case may be, to any other person, be
returned or liable to be returned to such person or-any
other person.”.
Insertion of 14. Aftcr’ section 18A of the principal Act [as
new sections inserted’ by scction 13 of the Enemy Property
(8B and 18C. (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2016], the O%: | of 2016.
following scctions shall be inserted, namely: -
Exclusion of 18B. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no civil
Jarisaiction of court or authority shall have jurisdiction to entertain any
oe suit or proceedings in respect of any property, subject
matter of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) ‘Third Ordinance, 2016, or
any action taken by the Central Government or the
Custodian in this regard.

[PAGE 11]
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTEOF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY il

Appeal to 18C. Any person aggrieved by an order of the

High Court, Central Government under section 18 of this Act,
may, within a period of sixty days from the date of
communication or receipt of the order, file an appéal
to the High Court on any question of fact or law
arising out of such orders, and upon such appeal the
High Court may, after hearing the parties, pass such
orders thereon as it thinks proper: .

Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied
that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause
from filing an appeal within the said period, allow it
to. be filed within a further period not exceeding sixty
days.

Explanation.. In this section, “High Court”

. means the High Court of a State or Union territory in
which the property referred to in section 18 is
situated.”. :

Amendment 15. In section 20 of the principal Act, for the words

of section 20. five hundred rupees” at both the places where they occur,
the words “ten thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
Amendment 16. On and from the date of commencement of the
of section 22. principal Act, in section 22 of the principal Act, after the
words “for the time being in force”, the brackets and
words “(including any law of succession or any custom or
usage in relation to succession of property)” shall be
_ inserted and shall always be deemed to have been
inserted.
Insertion of 17. After section 22 of the principal Act, the following
A section section shall be inserted and shall always be deemed to have
; been inserted with effect from the 2" July, 2010, namely:
Validation. “22A. Notwithstanding anything contained in any
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or
other authority,
(a) the provisions of this Act, as amended by
the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation)
Third Ordinance, 2016, shall have and shall always
be deemed to have effect for all purposes as if the
provisions of this Act, as amended by the said

[PAGE 12]
. 12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II—
Oe —————e—eeeeSwww0Ww0DOoODRDRDRO:««r«‘‘™
Ordinance, had been in force at all material times;
(6) any enemy property divested from the
Custodian to any person under the provisions of
. this Act, as it stood immediately before the
commencement of the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Third Ordinance,
2016, shall stand transferred tu and vest or
continue to vest, free from all encumbrances, in
the Custodian in the same manner as it was vested
in the Custodian before such divesting of enemy
property under the provisions of this Act, as if the
provisions of ‘this Act, as amended by the
aforesaid Ordinance, were in force at all material
times; ;

(c) no suit or other proceedings shall, without
prejudicc to the generality of the foregoing
provisions, be maintained or continucd in any .

; ; court or tribunal or authority for the enforcement
of any decree or order or direction given by such ;
court or tribunal or authority directing divestment
of enemy property from the Custodian vested in~
him under section 5 of this Act, as it stood before
the commencement of the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Third Ordinance,
2016, and such enemy property shall continue to
vest in the Custodian under section 5 of this Act,
as amended by the aforesaid Ordinance, as the said
: section, as amended by the aforesaid Ordinance
was in force at all material times;
(@) any transfer of any enemy property, vested
; in the Custodian, by virtue of any order of
attachment, seizure or sale in execution of decree
of a civil court or orders of any tribunal or other
authority in respect of enemy property vested in
the Custodian which is contrary to the provisions
of this Act, as amended by the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Third Ordinance,
. 2016, shall be deemed to be null and void and
notwithstanding such transfer, continue to vest in
the Custodian under this Act.”. ;
18. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section Amendment of
(2), clause (d) shall be omitted. Section 23.

[PAGE 13]
SEc. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 :
Power to 19. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
difficuttic provisions of the principal Act, as amended by the Enemy.
aa Property (Amendment and Validation) Third Ordinance,
2016, the Central Government may, by order, published
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as amended
by the Enemy Property (Amendment ‘and Validation)
Third Ordinance, 2016, or the Public Premises (Eviction
: of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, as amended by 40 of 1971.
the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation) Third
- Ordinance, 2016, as may appear to be necessary for
removing the difficulty:
, Provided that no such order shall be made under this
section after the expiry of two years from the date on
which the Bill replacing the Enemy Property
(Amendment and Validation) Third Ordinance, 2016,
receives the assent of the President.
; (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid,
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
: Parliament.
Amendment of 20. In the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
sections 2 an 3 a
3 of Act 40 of Occupants) Act,1971,
1971.
(a) in section 2, in clause (e), after sub-clause (3),
the following sub-clause shall be inserted, namely:
“(4) any premises of the enemy property as
defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Enemy 34 of 1968
Property Act, 1968.”; ° .
(d) in section 3, in clause (a),
(i) in the second proviso, the word “and” shall
be omitted;
(ii) after the second proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:
“Provided also that. the Custodian, Deputy
Custodian and Assistant Custodian of the enemy
property appointed under section 3 of the Enemy

[PAGE 14]
14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIAEXTRAORDINARY [Part II]— Sec. 1]
Property Act, 1968 shall be deemed to have been 34 of 1968.
appointed as the Estate Officer in respect of those
enemy property, being the public premises,
referred to in sub-clause (4) of clause (e) of section
2 of this Act for which they had been appointed
as the Custodian, Deputy Custodian and
Assistant Custodian under section 3 of the Enemy
Property Act, 1968.”.
21. Notwithstanding the cessation of the operation of Savings.
Ord. 4 of the Enemy Property (Amendment and Validation)
sora” Ordinance, 2010, anything done or any action taken
34 of 1968. under the Enemy Property Act, 1968, or the Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act,
40 of 1971. 1971, as amended by the Enemy Property (Amendment
and Validation) Ordinance, 2010, shall be deemed to
have been. done or taken under the corresponding
provisions of those Acts, as amended by the Enemy
Property (Amendment and Validation) Ordinance, 2010, ,
as if the provisions of this Act, as amended by the said
Ordinance had been in force at all material times.
Ord. 3 of 22. (J) The Enemy Property (Amendment and Repeal and
2016. Validation) Second Ordinance, 2016 is hereby repealed. 8@V!P8-
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or
34 of 1968. any action taken under the Enemy Property Act, 1968 as .
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have
been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of
the said Act, as amended by this Ordinance.
PRANAB MUKHERJEE,
President.
DR. G. NARAYANA RAJU,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
MANOJ iran
KUMAR sae
-" RINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI—2016.
GMGIPMRND—1111GI(CRC)—31-05-2016.