[PAGE 1]
1 ,-09)04/0007/2003-15 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003-15

The atettiz of 4nctia
dl tiltITTEIT
EXTRAORDINARY
NM H — W114' 1
PART II — Section 1
virtiwg t 5141Ptcf
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

"40 1 ] A9-411- 06, 2015/th 16; 1936 0140
No. 11 NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, JANUARY 06, 2015/PAUSA 16,1936 (SAKA)
iii IITTT 1/ 5TR iltu7kgr t wlna t fAu-4 fT are9. 4icnri-t * zurwr Tr* I
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.

MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)

New Delhi, the 6th January, 201 5IP ausa 16, 1936 (Saka)

THE CITIZENSHIP (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE, 2015
No. 1 OF 2015

Promulgated by the President in the Sixty-fifth Year of the Republic of India.

An Ordinance further to amend the Citizenship Act, 1955.

WHEREAS the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2014 has been introduced in the House of
the People and is pending in that House;

AND WHEREAS Parliament is not in session and the President is satisfied that
circumstances exist which render it necessary for him to take immediate action;

Now, THEREFORE, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause (1) of article 123 of the
Constitution, the President is pleased to promulgate the following Ordinance:—

1. (1) This Ordinance may be called the Citizenship (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015. Short title
and
commencement (2) It shall come into force at once.

[PAGE 2]
[PART I1--- THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

57 of 1955.
In the Citizenship Act. 1955 (hereinafter referred to as theAmendment 2.
of section 5. principal Act), in section 5,-

(i) in sub-section (1),in clause (f), for the words "has been residing in (a)
India for one year", the words "is ordinarily resident
in India for twelve months" shall be subStituted;

in clause (g), for the words "has been residing in (b)
India for one year", the words "is ordinarily resident
in India for twelve months" shall be substituted;

after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall (c)
be inserted, namely:—

"(1A) The Central Government, if it is satisfied that
special circumstances exist, may after recording the
circumstances in writing, relax the period of twelve months,
specified in clauses. (f) and (g) and clause (i) of Explanation 1 of
sub-section (1), upt6 a maximum of thirty days which may be in
different breaks.":

3. Ire the principal Act, for sections 7A, 7B, 7C and section 7D, Substitution
the following sections shall be substituted, namely.— of sections
7A, 7B, 7C
and 7D. - "7A. (1) The Central Government may, subject to such Registration
of Overseas_ conditions and restrictions, as may be prescribed, on an
Citizen of application made in this behalf, register as Overseas Citizen of
India India cardholder—
cardholder.
(a) any person of full age and capacity,—
who is a citizen of another country, but Was a citizen of - (i)
India at the time of, or at any time after, the commencement
of the Constitution; or
I who is a citizen of another country, but was eligible to (ii)
become a citizen of India at the time of the commencement
of the Constitution; or
who is a citizen of another country, but belonged to a (iii) day of territory that became part of India after the 15th
Aug,ust,1947; or

[PAGE 3]
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3

(iv) who is a child or a grand-child or a great grandchild of
such a citizen; or

(b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in
clause(a); or

(c) a person, who is a minor child, and whose both parents are
citizens of India or one of the parents is a citizen of India; or

(d) spouse of foreign origin of a citizen of India or spouse of
foreign origin of an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder
registered under section 7A and whose marriage has been
registered and subsisted for a continuous period of not less than
two years immediately preceding the presentation of the
application under this section:

Provided that for the eligibility for registration as Overseas
Citizen of India cardholder, such spouse shall be subjected to
prior security clearance from a competent authority in India:

Provided further that no person, who is or had been a
citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other country as the
Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify, shall be eligible for registration as Overseas
Citizen of India cardholder.

(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify the date from which the existing
Persons of Indian Origin cardholders shall be deemed to be
Overseas Citizens of India cardholders.

Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-section, (2), Persons 'of
Indian Origin cardholders mean the persons registered as such
under notification number 26011/4/98 F.I. dated the 19th
August; 2002, issued by the Central Government in this regard.

7B. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the Conferment of
time being in force, an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder shall be rights on•
Overseas Citizen entitled to such rights, other than the rights specified under sub- of India
section (2), as the Central Government may, by notification in the cardholder.
Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.. •

[PAGE 4]
[PART II— 4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

(2) An Overseas Citizen of India cardholder shall not be entitled to
the rights conferred on a citizen of India—

(a) under article 16 of the Constitution with regard to equality of
opportunity in matters of public employment;

(b) under article 58 of the Constitution for election as President;

(c) under article 66 of the Constitution for election as Vice-
President;

(d) under article 124 of the Constitution for appointment as a
Judge of the Supreme Court;

(e) under article 217 of the Constitution for appointment as a
judge of the High Court;

(f) ' under section 16 of the Representation of the People 43 of 1950.
Act,1950 in regard to registration as a voter;

(g) under sections 3 and 4 of the Representation of the People 43 of 1951. Act,1951 with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the
House of People or of the Council of States, as the case may be;

(h) under. sections 5,5A and section 6 of the Representation of 43 of 1951. the People Act,1951 with regard to eligibility for being a
member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative Council,
as the case may be, of a State;

(i) for appointment to public services and posts in connection
with affairs of the Union or of any State except for appointment
in such services and posts as the Central G6vgrnment may by
special order in that behalf specify.

(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid
before each House of Parliament

Renunciation 7C. (1) If any Overseas Citizen of India cardholder of full age and
of Overseas capacity makes in prescribed manner a declaration renouncing the
Citizen of card registering him as an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder, the
India card.
declaration shall be =registered by the Central Government, and upon
such registration, that person shall cease .to be an Overseas Citizen of
India cardholder.

[PAGE 5]
SEC. THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY

(2) Where a person ceases to be an Overseas Citizen of India
cardholder under sub-section (1), the spouse of foreign origin of that
person, who has obtained Overseas Citizen of India card under clause
(d) of sub-section (1) of section 7A, and every minor child of that
person registered as an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder shall
thereupon cease to be an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder.

7D. The Central Government may, by order cancel the registration Cancellation of
registration as granted under sub- section (1) of section 7A, if it is satisfied that- Overseas Citizen
of India card
holder.
(a) the registration as an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder
was obtained by means of fraud, false representation or the
concealment of any material fact; or

(b) the Overseas Citizen of India cardholder has shown
disaffection towards the Constitution of India, as by law
established; or

(c) the Overseas Citizen-of India cardholder has, during any war
in which India may be .engaged, unlawfully traded or
communicated with an enemy or been engaged in, or
associated with , any business or commercial activity that
was to his knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist
an enemy in that war; or

(d) the Overseas Citizen of India cardholder has, within five
. years after registration under sub-section (1) of section 7A,
been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of not less than
two years; or
,
(e) it is necessary so to do in the interests of the sovereignty and
integrity of India, the security of India, friendly relations of
India with any foreign country, or in the interests of the
general public; or

(f) the marriage of an Overseas Citizen of India cardholder,
who has obtained such card under clause (d) of sub-section
(1) of section 7A,-

(i) has been dissolved by a' competent court of law or
otherwise; or

[PAGE 6]
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART SEC. I]

(ii) has not been dissolved but, during the subsistence of
such marriage, he has solemnized marriage with any other
person.".

4. In the principal Act, in section 18, in sub-section (2), after Amendment of
clause (ee), following clauses shall be inserted, namely:- section 18.

"(eea) conditions and restrictions subject to which a person
may be registered as Overseas Citizen of India cardholder under
sub-section (1) of section 7A;

(eeb) manner of making declarations for renunciation of
- Overseas Citizen of India card under sub-section (1) of section
7C;".

Amendment 5. In the Third Schedule to the principal Act, in clause (c), the
of Third following proviso shall be inserted, namely:-
Schedule.
"Provided that if the Central Government is satisfied that special
circumstances exist, it may, after recording the circumstances in
writing, relax the period of twelve months upto a maximum of thirty
days which may be in different breaks.".

PRANAB MUKHERJEE,
President.

DR. SANJAY SINGH,
Secy. to the Government of India. .

•