[PAGE 1]
THE VICE-PRESIDENT’S PENSION ACT, 1997
(No. 30 of 1997)

An Act to provide for the payment of pension and other facilities to retiring Vice-
Presidents.

BE it enacted by Parliament in the forty eighth year of the Republic of India as
follows :-

1. Short title : This Act may be called the Vice-President’s Pension Act, 1997.

2. (1) There shall be paid to every person who ceases to hold office as Vice-President,
either by expiration of his term of office or by resignation of his office, a pension 1$(at the
rate of fifty per cent of the salary of the Vice-President) per month, for the remainder of his
life:

Provided that such person shall not be entitled to receive any pension during the
period he holds the office of the Prime Minister, a Minister or any other office or becomes a
Member of Parliament and is in receipt of salary and allowances which are defrayed out of
the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of a State.

2^{(1A) The spouse of a person who dies –

(a) while holding the office of Vice-President, or

(b) after ceasing to hold office as Vice-President either by the expiration of his term
of office or by resignation of his office,

shall be paid a family pension at the rate of fifty per cent of pension as is admissible to a
retiring Vice-President, for the remainder of her life.}

(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, every such person shall, for
the remainder of his life, be entitled –

3#{(a) to the use without payment of rent of such furnished residence (including its
maintenance), as the Central Government may determine from time to time;}

(b) to the use of similar telephone facilities at his residence, as a Member of
Parliament is entitled to under the provisions of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of
Members of Parliament Act, 1954;

4{(c) to secretarial staff consisting of a Private Secretary, an Additional Private
Secretary, a Personal Assistant and two Peons and office expenses not exceeding 5[ninety
thousand rupees] per annum;}

1$( ) Substituted vide the Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008 (Act 29 of 2008) and made
effective from 1st January, 2006.
2^ {} Inserted vide the Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 2002 (Act 23 of 2002) and made effective
from 5th July, 2002.
3# {} Substituted vide the Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 1999 ( Act 45 of 1999).
4 { } Substituted vide the Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008 (Act 29 of 2008)
5 [ ] substituted vide Finance Act 2018 (Act 17 of 2018) and made effective from 1.4.2018.

[PAGE 2]
(d) to the same facilities for himself as respects medical attendance and treatment and
on the same conditions as a retired President is entitled to under the provisions of the
President’s Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951;

(e) to the same facilities for his spouse and minor children as respects medical
attendance and treatment and on the same conditions as the spouse of a retired President is
entitled to under the provisions of the President’s Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951; and

6@[(f) to travel anywhere in India, accompanied by spouse or a companion or a
relative, by the highest class by air, rail or steamer.]

(3) Where any such person is re-elected to the office of Vice-President he or his
spouse shall not be eligible to any benefit under this section for the period during which such
person again holds such office.

(4) Where any person being a Vice-President gets elected to the office of the President
of India, he or his spouse shall not be eligible to any benefit under this section.

3. Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of a person who dies
while holding the office of Vice-President shall, for the remainder of life, be entitled to
medical attendance and treatment, free of charge.

7^{3A. Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of a person who dies
–

(a) while holding the office of Vice-President, or

(b) after ceasing to hold office as Vice-President either by the expiration of his term
of office or by resignation of his office,

shall be entitled to the use of 4{furnished residence (including its maintenance)} without
payment of licence fee, for the remainder of her life.}

4. Any sum payable under this Act shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.

5. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously
done under that rule.

6@ [ ] Substituted vide the Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 1999 (Act 45 of 1999)
7^ { } Inserted vide the Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 2002 (Act 23 of 2002) and made effective
from 5th July, 2002.

[PAGE 3]
8$[6. Power to remove difficulties - (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act as amended by the Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008,
the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions for
the purpose of removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the date on
which this Act comes into force.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.]

-: oOo:-

8 $[ ] Inserted vide the Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008 (Act 29 of 2008)