[PAGE 1]
THE PRESIDENT’S 1^(EMOLUMENTS AND) PENSION ACT, 1951
( 30 OF 1951 )

The Principal Act received the assent of the President on the 13th May, 1951 and
published in the Gazette of India on 17th May, 1951

An act to provide 1^(for the emoluments of the President and for) pension to
retiring Presidents.

Be it enacted by Parliament as follows:-

1. Short title : This Act may be called the President’s 1^(Emoluments and)
Pension Act, 1951.

1^ [1A. There shall be paid to the President by way of emoluments 2$(one lakh fifty
thousand rupees) per mensem.]

2. (1) Pension to retiring Presidents – There shall be paid to every person who
ceases to hold office as President either by the expiration of his term of office or by
resignation of his office, a pension of 2$(at the rate of fifty per cent of the emoluments
of the President per month) for the remainder of his life.

3*@ Provided that if any person before assuming the office of President, has held
the office of the Vice-President, such person shall not be entitled to any pension and other
benefits under the provisions of the Vice-President’s Pension Act, 1997.

(2) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, every such person shall,
for the remainder of his life, be entitled to –

4{(a) to the use of a furnished residence (including its maintenance),
without payment of rent, two telephones (one for internet and
broadband connectivity), one mobile phone with national roaming
facility and a motor-car, free of charge or to such car allowance as
may be specified in the rules;

(b) to secretarial staff consisting of a Private Secretary, one Additional
Private Secretary, one Personal Assistant, two Peons, and office
expenses up to sixty thousand rupees per annum;}

1^ ( ) Inserted vide the President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 1985 (77 of 1985). Made effective from 26-
12-1985.
2$ ( ) Substituted vide the President’s Emoluments and Pension Act, 2008 (28 of 2008). Made effective
from 1-1-2006.
3* @ Inserted vide President’s Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 1998 (25 of 1998).

[PAGE 2]
5[(c) to medical attendance and treatment free of charge;]

6*(d) to travel anywhere in India accompanied by one person by the
highest class by air, rail or steamer.

Explanation – For the purpose of this sub-section “residence” shall have the
meaning assigned to it in the Salaries and Allowances of Ministers Act, 1952.

7* [(2A) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of
every such person shall, for the remainder of life be entitled to medical attendance
and treatment, free of charge.

(3) Where any person is re-elected to the office of President, such
person or the spouse of such person shall not be entitled to any benefit
under this Section for the period during which such person again holds
that office.]

8^[2A. The spouse of a person who dies –

(a) while holding the office of President, or

(b) after ceasing to hold office as president either by the expiration of
his term of office or by resignation of his office,

shall be paid a family pension at the rate of fifty per cent of pension as is admissible to a
retiring President, for the remainder of her life.

3. Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of a person who
dies while holding the office of President shall, for the remainder of life be entitled to
medical attendance and treatment, free of charge.

3A. Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the spouse of a person who
dies –

(a) while holding the office of President, or

9{(b) after ceasing to hold office as President, either on the expiration of his
term of office or by resignation of his office, shall be entitled, -

5 [ ] Substituted vide the President’s Emoluments and Pension Act, 1990 (16of 1990). Made effective from
29-6-1990.
6* Added vide the President’s Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 1993 (71 of 1993). Made
effective from 27-12-1993.
7 [ ] Added vide the President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 1976.
8^ [ ] Inserted vide President’s Emoluments and Pension (Amendment) Act, 2000 (14 of 2000). Made
effective from 11-8-2000.

[PAGE 3]
(i) to the use of furnished residence (including its maintenance) without
payment of licence fee;

(ii) to secretarial staff consisting of a Private Secretary and a Peon and
office expenses as per actuals, the total expenditure on which shall not exceed
twelve thousand rupees per annum;

(iii) to a telephone and a motor-car, free of charge or such car allowance
for the remainder of his life, as may be specified in the rules;

(iv) to travel anywhere in India, in a calendar year to twelve single
journeys, by the highest class, by air, rail or steamer, accompanied by a
companion or a relative.}]

4. Pensions to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India:- Any sum payable
under this Act shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.

5. (1) The Central government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.

(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid as
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the successive sessions aforesaid, both
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.

9{6. Power to remove difficulties - (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, as amended by the President’s Emoluments and Pension
(Amendment) Act, 2008, the Central Government may, by order, do anything not
inconsistent with such provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty:

Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from
the date on which this Act comes into force.

(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.}
-: oOo :-