[PAGE 1]
A rh 8. 221
REGISTERED NO. D.221
MEG .
\ a
YN SA
The Gazette of India
STATE
EXTRAORDINARY
amt Il - wos |
PART UL — Section I
oiferare S vepterat
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY a
: a. 48] ae facet, tea, 3mm 20, 1968/ sraem 29, 1890
No.48] | NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, AUGUST 20, 1968/SRAVANA 29, 1890 .
se ue 4h Airs gw Her at ort & farae fee ae wan daar wo Lan oT a |
. Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed
as a separate compilation
MINISTRY OF LAW
(Legislative Department) ;
New Delhi, the 20" August, 1968/Sravana 29, 1890 (Saka) fa
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on
20" August, 1968 and is hereby published for general information:-
OLS Nils WIR Vas Pea @ bias) ena n @ulaem nore
No. 34 OF 1968
[20" August, 1968]
An Act to provide far the continued vesting of enemy property vested in
the Custodian of Enemy Property for India under the Defence of India
‘Rules, 1962, [and the Defence of India Rules, 1971] and for matters
connected therewith.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Nineteenth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:-
(1) The Act may be called the Enemy Property Act, 1968 Short title
extent,
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and application
Kashmir and it applies also to all citizens of India outside India and to at
branches and agencies outside India of companies or bodies corporate ent
registered or incorpcrated in India. ‘
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 10" day of
July , 1968. !
Definition 2. Inthis Act, untess the context otherwise requires,-
*| ] Inserted by Enemy Property (Amendment) Act, 1977 came into force on 27.9,1977 (Act No.40 of 1977)
\

[PAGE 2]
@ — (a)’Custodian” means the Custodian of Enemy Property for India
appointed or deemed to have been appointed under section 3 and includes
a Deputy Custodian and an Assistant Custodian of Enemy Property
appointed or deemed to have been appointed under that section;
(b) “enemy” or “enemy subject” or “enémy firm” means a person
or country who or which was an enemy, an enemy subject or an enemy ;
firm, as the case may be, under the Defence of India Act, 1962 and the
Defence of India Rules, 1962 *[or the Defence of India Act, 1971 and the
Defence of India Rules, 1971] but does not include a citizen of India; 51 of 1962
(c) “enemy property” means by property for the time being
belonging to or held or managed on behalf of an enemy, an enemy subject
or an enemy firm:
Provided. that where an individual enemy subject dies in the
territories to which this Act extends, any property which immediately
before his death, belonged to or was held by him or was managed on his
behalf, may, notwithstanding his death continue to be regarded as enemyh
property for the purposes of this Act;
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Appointment 3. The Central Government may, by notification in the Official :
of Custodian Gazette, appoint a Custodian of Enemy Property for India and one or
of Enemy more Deputy Custodians and Assistant Custodians of Enemy Property for
Property for such local areas as may be specified in the notification;
India and
Deputy 5 , 4
Custodian Provided that the Custodian of Enemy Property for India and the
aie. , Deputy Custodian or Assistant Custodian of Enmemy Property appointed
under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 *[or the Defence of India Rules,
1971] shall be deemed to have been appointed under this section.
Pp
Appointment 4. The Central Government may, either generally or for any
of Inspectors particular area, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint one or
of Enemy more Inspectors of Enemy Property for securing compliance with the
LPRopTABY. provisions of this Act and may, by general or special order, provide for
the distribution and allocation of the work to be performed by them for
securing such compliance;
Provided that every Inspector of Enemy Firms appointed under the
Defence of India Rules, 1962 *[ or the Defence of India Rules, 1971, as
the case may be] shall be deemed to be an Inspector of Enemy Property
appointed under this section.
Property 5. *[(1)] Notwithstanding the expiration of the Defence of India
vested inthe Act, 1962 and the Defence of India Rules, 1962, all enemy property :
Custodian of — vested before such expiration in the Custodian of Enemy Property for
Enemy India appointed under the said Rules and continuing to vest in him
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall, as from such propery
commencement, vest in the Custodian. Ineianndes
*[] inserted by the Enemy Property (Amendment) Act, 1977; came into force on 27.9.1977 (Act No.40 of 1977)

[PAGE 3]
A
f ' .
& the Defence
*[ (2) Notwithstanding the expiration of the Defence of India Act, of India

1971 and the Defence of India Rules, 1971, all enemy property vested Rules, 1962
before such expiration in the Custodian of Enemy property for India {0 continue
appointed under the said Rules and continuing to vest in him immediately MOVES Tt
before the commencement of the Enemy Property (Amendment)Act, 1977 Custedist
shall, as from such commencement, vest in the Custodian.]

6. Where any property vested in the Custodian under this Act has Transfer of
been transferred, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, property
by an enemy or an enemy subject or an enemy firm and where it appears vested in
to the Central Government that such transfer is injurious to the public Custodian
interest or was made with a view to evading or defeating the vesting of Py aay
the property in the Custodian, then the Central Government may, after subject or
giving a reasonable opportunity to the transferee to be heard in the matter, enemy
by order, declare such transfer to be void and on the making of such firm.
order, the property shall continue to vest or be deemed to vest in the
Custodian.

7. (1) Any such payable by way of dividend, interest, share profits Payment to
or otherwise to or for the benefit of an enemy or an enemy subject or an Custodian
enemy firm shall, under otherwise ordered by the Central Government, be of money
paid by the person by whom such sum would have been payable but for otherwise
the prohibition under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 *[{ or the Defence payabicie
of India Rules, 1971, as the case may be] to the Custodian or such person enemy.
as may be authorized by him in this behalf and shall be held by the subject or
Custodian or such person subject to the provisions of this Act. enemy

firm.

(2) In cases in which money would, but for the prohibition
under the Defence of India Rules, 1962 *[ or the Defence of India Rules,
1971, as the case may be] by payable in a foreign currency to or for the
benefit of an enemy or an enemy subject or an enemy firm (other than
cases in which money is payable under a contract in which provision is
made for a specified rate of exchange), the payment shall be made to the
Custodian in rupee currency at the middle official rate of exchange fixed
by the Reserve Bank of India on the date on which the payment became
due to that enemy, enemy subject or enemy firm.

(3) The Custodian shall, subject to the provisions of Section 8,
deal with any money paid to him under the Defence of India Rules, 1962
*{ or the Defence of India Rules, 1971, as the case may be] or under this
Act and any property vested in him under this Act in such manner as the
Central Government may direct.

8. (1) with respect to the property vested in the Custodian under this Powers of
Act, the Custodian may take or authorize the taking of such measures as Custodian
he considers necessary or expedient for preserving such property and Boe Speck
where such property belongs to an individual enemy subject, may incur enemy
such expenditure out of the property as he considers necessary or eae
expedient for the maintenance of that individual or of his family in India. rita,

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision,
*[] inserted by the Enemy Property (Amendment) Act, 1977; came into force on 27.9.1977 (Act No.40 of 1977) 7
, fd
\

[PAGE 4]
| Qy
Nis the Custodian or such person as may be specifically authorized by him in e
this behalf, may, for the said purpose.- : j
() carry on the business of the enemy;
(ii) take action for recovering any money due to the enemy;
(iii) make any contract and execute any document in the name and
on behalf of the enemy;
(iv) institute, defend or continue any suit or other legal
proceedings, refer any dispute to arbitration and compromise any
debts, claims or liabilities;
(v) raise on the security of the property such loans as may be
necessary;
(vi) incur out of the property any expenditure including the
payment of any taxes, duties, cesses and rates to Government or to .
‘any local authority and of any wages, salaries, pensions, provident
fund contributions to, or in respect of, any employee of the enemy
and the repayment of any debts due by the enemy to persons other
than enemies;
(vii) transfer by way of sale, mortgage or lease or otherwise
dispose of any of the properties;
(vill) invest any moneys held by him on behalf of enemies for the
purchase of Treasury Bills or such other Government securities as
may be approved by the Central government for the purpose;
(ix) make payments to the enemy and his dependents;
(x) make paytaents on behalf of the enemy to persons other than
those who are enemies of dues outstanding on the 25" October,
1962; * [or on the 3 December, 1971] and
(xi) make such other payments out of the funds of the enemy as
may be directed by the Central Government.
Explanation.- In this sub-section and in sections 10 and 17, “enemy”
includes an enemy subject and an enemy firm.
Exemption 9. All enemy property vested in the Custodian under this Act shall be
from exempt from attachment, seizure or sale in execution decree of a civil
attachment, court or orders of any other authority.
etc.
Transfer of 10. (1) Where in exercise of the powers conferred by section 8, the
securities Custodian proposes to sell any security issued by a company. and
belonging to belonging to an enemy, the company may, with the consent of the
CEN), Custodian, purchase the securities, notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in any law or in any regulations of the company and any
securities so purchased may be re-issued by the company as ..ad when it
*[] inserted by the Enemy Property (Amendment) Act, 1977; came into forse on 27.9.1977 (Act No.40 of 1977)

[PAGE 5]
. ;
ay thinks fit so to do.

(2) Where the Custodian executes and transfers any securities
issued by a company, the company shall, on receipt of the transfer and an
order in this behalf from the Custodian, register the securities in the name
of the transferee, notwithstanding that the regulations of the company do
not permit such registration in the absence of the certificate, script or
other evidence of title relating to the securities transferred. .

Provided that any such registration shall be without prejudice to any
lien or charge in favour of the company and to any other lien or charge of
which the Custodian gives express notice to the company.

Explanation.- \n this section, “securities” includes shares, stocks, bonds,
debentures and debenture stock but does not include bills of exchange.

11. (1) The Custodian may, by notice in writing, require any person Power of
whom he believes to be capable of giving information concerning any Custodian
enemy property to attend before him at such time and place as may be fosummon
specified in the notice and examine any such person conceming the same, eae une
reduce his statement to writing and require him to sign it. SAU:

documents

(2) The Custodian may, by notice in writing, require aay person
whom he believes to have in his possession or control any account book,,
letter book, invoice, receipt or other document of whatever nature relating
to any enemy property, to produce the same or cause the same to be
praduced before the Custodian at such time and place as may be specified
in the notice and to submit the same to his examination and to allow
copies of any entry therein or any part thereof to be taken by him.

102. Where any order with respect to any money or property is Protection
addressed to any person by the Custodian and accompanied by a for :
certificate of the Custodian that the money or property is money or complying
property vested in him under the Act, the certificate shall be evidence of Be lossless
the facts stated therein and if that person complies with the orders of the ee
Custodian, he shall not be liable to any suit or other legal proceeding by . .
reason only of such compliance.

13. Where under this Act, - Validity of
action taken
(a) any money is paid to the Custodian; or ut
pursuance
(b) any property is vested in the Custodian or an order is given acne
to any person by the Custodian in relation to any property : .
which appears to the Custodian to be enemy property vested in
him under this Act ,
neither the payment, vesting nor order of the Custodian nor any
proceedings in consequence thereof shall be invalidated or affected by
reason only that at a material time, -
(1) some person who was or might have been interested in the money ;
*[ ] inserted by the Enemy Property (Amendment) Act, 1977; came into force on 27.9.1977 (Act No.40 of 1977)

[PAGE 6]
| eS
( or property and who was an enemy or an enemy firm had died or
had ceased to be an enemy or an enemy firm; or
(2) some person who was so interested and who was believed by the
Custodian to be an enemy or an enemy firm, was not an enemy
or an enemy firm.
Proceedings 14. Where the enemy property vested in the Custodian under this
against Act consists of assets of a company, no proceeding, civil or criminal,
Welupe Mies shall be instituted under the Companies Act, 1956, against the company
Naren assets or any director, manager or other officer thereof except with the consent
Gusvortern. in writing of the Custodian.
Returns as to 1S. (1) The Custodian may call for from persons who, in his
enemy opinion, have any interest in, or control over, any enemy property vested
jeuceypearegy in him under this Act, such returns as may be prescribed.

(2) Every person from whom a return is called for under subsection (1) skall be bound to submit such return within the prescribed
period.

Registers of 16. (1) All returns relating to enemy property submitted to the
returns Custodian under this Act shall be recorded in such registers as may be
prescribed. ;
(2) All such registers shall be open to inspection subject to the
payment of such fees as may be prescribed and to such reasonable
restrictions as the Custodian may impose to any person who, in the
opinion of the Custodian, is interested in any particular enemy property as
a creditor or otherwise and any such person may also obtain a copy of the
relevant portion from the registers on payment of the prescribed fees.
Levy of fees 17. (1) There shall be levided by the Custodian fees equal to two
per centum of —
(a) the amount of moneys paid to him;
(b) the proceeds of the sale or transfer of any property which has
been vested in him under this Act; and
(c) the value of the residual property, if any, at the time of its transfer
to the original owner or other person specified by the Central
Government under section 18.

Provided that in the case of any enemy whose property is allowed
by the Custodian to be managed by some person specially authorized in
that behalf, there shall be levied a fee of two per centum of the gross
income of the enemy or such less fee as may be specifically fixed by the
Central Government after taking into consideration the cost of direct
management incurred by that Government, the cost of superior
supervision and any risks that may be incurred by that Government in
respect of the management:

Provided further that the Central Government may, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, reduce or remit the fees leviable under this subsection in any special case or class of cases.

*[ inserted by the Enemy Property (Amendment) Act, 1977; came into force on 27.9.1977 (Act No.40 of 1977)

[PAGE 7]
. t
ad Explanation.--' \n this sub-section “gross income of the enemy”
means income derived out of the properties of the enemy vested in the
Custodian under this Act.

(2) The value of any property for the purpose of assessing the fees
shall be the price which, in the opinion of the Central Government or of
an authority empowered in this behalf by the Central Government, such
property would fetch if sold in the open market.

(3) The fees in respect of property may be levied out of any
proceeds of the sale or transfer thereof or out of any income accrued
therefrom or out of any other property belonging to the same enemy and
vested in the Custodian under this Act.

(4) The fees levied under this section shall be credited to the
Central Government.

18. The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct Divesting
that any enemy property vested in the Custodian under this Act and of enemy
remaining with him shall be divested from him and be returned, in such property
manner as may be prescribed, to the owner thereof or to such other — 0
person as may be specified in the direction and thereupon such property’ Fe

‘ : : Custodian
shall cease to vest in the Custodian and shall revest in such owner of
other person.

19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against Protection
the Central Government or the Custodian or an Inspector of Enemy of action
Property for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done taken under
under this Act. the Act.

20. (1) If any person makes any payment in contravention of the Penalty
provisions of sub-section (1) of section 7, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine, or
with both and the payment or dealing shall be void.

(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub-section (2)
of section 10, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both.

(3) If any person fails to comply with a requisition made by
the Custodian under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 11, he :
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.

(4) If any person fails to submit the return under sub-section
(2) of Section 15,\ or furnishes such return containing any particular
which is false and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be
true, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees.
Offences by 21. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a
companies company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was
in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the
*[ inserted by the Enemy Property (Amendment) Act, 1977; came into force on 27.9.1977 (Act No.40 of 1977)

[PAGE 8]
i business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be
; guilty of the office aad shali ve liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly:

Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
such person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence
to prevent the commission of such offence.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where
. an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is
proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and
punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, --
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a
firm or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the
firm.
Effect oflaws ~ 22. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
inconsistent anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
with the Act. being in force.
Power tc 23. (1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the
make rules purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such rules may provide for -- : ;
(a) the returns that may be called for by the Custodian under subsection (1) of section 15 and the period within which such returns shall
be submitted under sub-section (2) of that section;

(b) the registers in which the returns relating to enemy property

shall be recorded under section 16;
(c) the fees for the inspection of registers and for obtaining copies
of the relevant portions from the registers under sub-section (2) of
section 16;
(d) the manner in which enemy property vested in the Custodian
may be returned under section 18;
(ec) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this
*[ inserted by the Enemy Property (Amendment) Act, 1977; came into force on 27.9.1977 (Act No.40 of 1977)

[PAGE 9]
s. | ®
ce
( Sa section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made, before each
Ilouce of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days
which may be comprised in one session *{or in two or more successive
sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid ] both Houses agree in
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or of no effect, as the case may be; so however that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that rule.
*( ] substituted for certain words by Act 40 of 1977
24. *{(1)] Every order which was made under the Defence of India Certain
Rules, 1962, by the Central government or by the Custodian of Enemy orders
Property for India appointed under those Rules, relating to enemy made under
property and which was in force immediately before the expiration the Defence
thereof shall, in so far as such order is not inconsistent with the Benes
a . , a Rules,
provisions of this Act, be deemed to continue in force and to have been 1962. to
made under this Act. eonuauelin
force.
*((2) Every order which was made under the Defence of India
Rules, 1971 by the Central Government or by the Custodian of Enemy
Property for India appointed under those Rules relating to enemy
property and which was in force immediately before the expiration
thereof shall, in so far as such order is not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, be deemed to continue in force and to have been
made under this Act.]
25. (1) The Enemy Property Ordinance, 1968, is hereby repealed. Repeal and
saving
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything, done or any action
taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
V.N.BHATIA
Secy. to the Govt. of India
*[] inserted by the Enemy Property (Amendment) Act, 1977; came into force on 27.9.1977 (Act No.40 of 1977)